The Project Gutenberg eBook of Gabrielle de Bergerac, by Henry James

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Gabrielle de Bergerac

Author: Henry James

Release Date: May 31, 2021 [eBook #65481]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Laura Natal Rodrigues at Free Literature (Images generously
             made available by Hathi Trust Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GABRIELLE DE BERGERAC ***

GABRIELLE DE BERGERAC



BY HENRY JAMES




NEW YORK

BONI AND LIVERIGHT

1918




CONTENTS

  PART I
  PART II
  PART III




GABRIELLE DE BERGERAC


PART I


My good old friend, in his white flannel dressing-gown, with his wig
"removed," as they say of the dinner-service, by a crimson nightcap, sat
for some moments gazing into the fire. At last he looked up. I knew what
was coming. "Apropos, that little debt of mine--"

Not that the debt was really very little. But M. de Bergerac was a man
of honor, and I knew I should receive my dues. He told me frankly that
he saw no way, either in the present or the future, to reimburse me in
cash. His only treasures were his paintings; would I choose one of them?
Now I had not spent an hour in M. de Bergerac's little parlor twice a
week for three winters, without learning that the Baron's paintings
were, with a single exception, of very indifferent merit. On the other
hand, I had taken a great fancy to the picture thus excepted. Yet, as I
knew it was a family portrait, I hesitated to claim it. I refused to
make a choice. M. de Bergerac, however, insisted, and I finally laid my
finger on the charming image of my friend's aunt. I of course insisted,
on my side, that M. de Bergerac should retain it during the remainder of
his life, and so it was only after his decease that I came into
possession of it. It hangs above my table as I write, and I have only to
glance up at the face of my heroine to feel how vain it is to attempt to
describe it. The portrait represents, in dimensions several degrees
below those of nature, the head and shoulders of a young girl of
two-and-twenty. The execution of the work is not especially strong, but
it is thoroughly respectable and one may easily see that the painter
deeply appreciated the character of the face. The countenance is
interesting rather than beautiful,--the forehead broad and open, the
eyes slightly prominent, all the features full and firm and yet replete
with gentleness. The head is slightly thrown back, as if in movement,
and the lips are parted in a half-smile. And yet, in spite of this
tender smile, I always fancy that the eyes are sad. The hair, dressed
without powder, is rolled back over a high cushion (as I suppose), and
adorned just above the left ear with a single white rose; while, on the
other side, a heavy tress from behind hangs upon the neck with a sort of
pastoral freedom. The neck is long and full, and the shoulders rather
broad. The whole face has a look of mingled softness and decision, and
seems to reveal a nature inclined to revery, affection, and repose, but
capable of action and even of heroism. Mlle. de Bergerac died under the
axe of the Terrorists. Now that I had acquired a certain property in
this sole memento of her life, I felt a natural curiosity as to her
character and history. Had M. de Bergerac known his aunt? Did he
remember her? Would it be a tax on his good-nature to suggest that he
should favor me with a few reminiscences? The old man fixed his eyes on
the fire, and laid his hand on mine, as if his memory were fain to draw
from both sources--from the ruddy glow and from my fresh young blood--a
certain vital, quickening warmth. A mild, rich smile ran to his lips,
and he pressed my hand. Somehow,--I hardly know why,--I felt touched
almost to tears. Mlle. de Bergerac had been a familiar figure in her
nephew's boyhood, and an important event in her life had formed a sort
of episode in his younger days. It was a simple enough story; but such
as it was, then and there, settling back into his chair, with the
fingers of the clock wandering on to the small hours of the night, he
told it with a tender, lingering garrulity. Such as it is, I repeat it.
I shall give, as far as possible, my friend's words, or the English of
them; but the reader will have to do without his inimitable accents. For
them there is no English.

My father's household at Bergerac (said the Baron) consisted, exclusive
of the servants, of five persons,--himself, my mother, my aunt (Mlle. de
Bergerac), M. Coquelin (my preceptor), and M. Coquelin's pupil, the heir
of the house. Perhaps, indeed, I should have numbered M. Coquelin among
the servants. It is certain that my mother did. Poor little woman! she
was a great stickler for the rights of birth. Her own birth was all she
had, for she was without health, beauty, or fortune. My father, on his
side, had very little of the last; his property of Bergerac yielded only
enough to keep us without discredit. We gave no entertainments, and
passed the whole year in the country; and as my mother was resolved that
her weak health should do her a kindness as well as an injury, it was
put forward as an apology for everything. We led at best a simple,
somnolent sort of life. There was a terrible amount of leisure for rural
gentlefolks in those good old days. We slept a great deal; we slept, you
will say, on a volcano. It was a very different world from this patent
new world of yours, and I may say that I was born on a different planet.
Yes, in 1789, there came a great convulsion; the earth cracked and
opened and broke, and this poor old _pays de France_ went whirling
through space. When I look back at my childhood, I look over a gulf.
Three years ago, I spent a week at a country house in the neighborhood
of Bergerac, and my hostess drove me over to the site of the château.
The house has disappeared, and there's a homœopathic--hydropathic--what
do you call it?--establishment erected in its place. But the little town
is there, and the bridge on the river, and the church where I was
christened, and the double row of lime-trees on the market-place, and
the fountain in the middle. There's only one striking difference: the
sky is changed. I was born under the old sky. It was black enough, of
course, if we had only had eyes to see it; but to me, I confess, it
looked divinely blue. And in fact it was very bright,--the little patch
under which I cast my juvenile shadow. An odd enough little shadow you
would have thought it. I was promiscuously cuddled and fondled. I was M.
le Chevalier, and prospective master of Bergerac; and when I walked to
church on Sunday, I had a dozen yards of lace on my coat and a little
sword at my side. My poor mother did her best to make me good for
nothing. She had her maid to curl my hair with the tongs, and she used
with her own fingers to stick little black patches on my face. And yet I
was a good deal neglected too, and I would go for days with black
patches of another sort. I'm afraid I should have got very little
education if a kind Providence hadn't given me poor M. Coquelin. A kind
Providence, that is, and my father; for with my mother my tutor was no
favorite. She thought him--and, indeed, she called him--a bumpkin, a
clown. There was a very pretty abbé among her friends, M. Tiblaud by
name, whom she wished to install at the château as my intellectual, and
her spiritual, adviser; but my father, who, without being anything of an
_esprit fort_, had an incurable aversion to a priest out of church, very
soon routed this pious scheme. My poor father was an odd figure of a
man. He belonged to a type as completely obsolete as the biggest of
those big-boned, pre-historic monsters discovered by M. Cuvier. He was
not overburdened with opinions or principles. The only truth that was
absolute to his perception was that the house of Bergerac was _de bonne
noblesse._ His tastes were not delicate. He was fond of the open air, of
long rides, of the smell of the game-stocked woods in autumn, of playing
at bowls, of a drinking-cup, of a dirty pack of cards, and a free-spoken
tavern Hebe. I have nothing of him but his name. I strike you as an old
fossil, a relic, a mummy. Good heavens! you should have seen him,--his
good, his bad manners, his arrogance, his _bonhomie_, his stupidity and
pluck.

My early years had promised ill for my health; I was listless and
languid, and my father had been content to leave me to the women, who,
on the whole, as I have said, left me a good deal to myself. But one
morning he seemed suddenly to remember that he had a little son and heir
running wild. It was, I remember, in my ninth year, a morning early in
June, after breakfast, at eleven o'clock. He took me by the hand and led
me out on the terrace, and sat down and made me stand between his knees.
I was engaged upon a great piece of bread and butter, which I had
brought away from the table. He put his hand into my hair, and, for the
first time that I could remember, looked me straight in the face. I had
seen him take the forelock of a young colt in the same way, when he
wished to look at its teeth. What did he want? Was he going to send me
for sale? His eyes seemed prodigiously black and his eyebrows terribly
thick. They were very much the eyebrows of that portrait. My father
passed his other hand over the muscles of my arms and the sinews of my
poor little legs.

"Chevalier," said he, "you're dreadfully puny. What's one to do with
you?"

I dropped my eyes and said nothing. Heaven knows I felt puny.

"It's time you knew how to read and write. What are you blushing at?"

"I _do_ know how to read," said I.

My father stared. "Pray, who taught you?"

"I learned in a book."

"What book?"

I looked up at my father before I answered. His eyes were bright, and
there was a little flush in his face,--I hardly knew whether of pleasure
or anger. I disengaged myself and went into the drawing-room, where I
took from a cupboard in the wall an odd volume of Scarron's _Roman
comique._ As I had to go through the house, I was absent some minutes.
When I came back I found a stranger on the terrace. A young man in poor
clothes, with a walking-stick, had come up from the avenue, and stood
before my father, with his hat in his hand. At the farther end of the
terrace was my aunt. She was sitting on the parapet, playing with a
great black crow, which we kept in a cage in the dining-room window. I
betook myself to my father's side with my book, and stood staring at our
visitor. He was a dark-eyed, sunburnt young man, of about twenty-eight,
of middle height, broad in the shoulders and short in the neck, with a
slight lameness in one of his legs. He looked travel-stained and weary
and pale. I remember there was something prepossessing in his being
pale. I didn't know that the paleness came simply from his being
horribly hungry.

"In view of these facts," he said, as I came up, "I have ventured to
presume upon the good-will of M. le Baron."

My father sat back in his chair, with his legs apart and a hand on each
knee and his waistcoat unbuttoned, as was usual after a meal. "Upon my
word," he said, "I don't know what I can do for you. There's no place
for you in my own household."

The young man was silent a moment. "Has M. le Baron any children?" he
asked, after a pause.

"I have my son whom you see here."

"May I inquire if M. le Chevalier is supplied with a preceptor?"

My father glanced down at me. "Indeed, he seems to be," he cried. "What
have you got there?" And he took my book. "The little rascal has M.
Scarron for a teacher. This is his preceptor!"

I blushed very hard, and the young man smiled. "Is that your only
teacher?" he asked.

"My aunt taught me to read," I said, looking round at her.

"And did your aunt recommend this book?" asked my father.

"My aunt gave me M. Plutarque," I said.

My father burst out laughing, and the young man put his hat up to his
mouth. But I could see that above it his eyes had a very good-natured
look. My aunt, seeing that her name had been mentioned, walked slowly
over to where we stood, still holding her crow on her hand. You have her
there before you; judge how she looked. I remember that she frequently
dressed in blue, my poor aunt, and I know that she must have dressed
simply. Fancy her in a light stuff gown, covered with big blue flowers,
with a blue ribbon in her dark hair, and the points of her high-heeled
blue slippers peeping out under her stiff white petticoat. Imagine her
strolling along the terrace of the château with a villainous black crow
perched on her wrist. You'll admit it's a picture.

"Is all this true, sister?" said my father. "Is the Chevalier such a
scholar?"

"He's a clever boy," said my aunt, putting her hand on my head.

"It seems to me that at a pinch he could do without a preceptor," said
my father. "He has such a learned aunt."

"I've taught him all I know. He had begun to ask me questions that I was
quite unable to answer."

"I should think he might," cried my father, with a broad laugh, "when
once he had got into M. Scarron!"

"Questions out of Plutarch," said Mlle. de Bergerac, "which you must
know Latin to answer."

"Would you like to know Latin, M. le Chevalier?" said the young man,
looking at me with a smile.

"Do you know Latin,--you?" I asked.

"Perfectly," said the young man, with the same smile.

"Do you want to learn Latin, Chevalier?" said my aunt.

"Every gentleman learns Latin," said the young man.

I looked at the poor fellow, his dusty shoes and his rusty clothes. "But
you're not a gentleman," said I.

He blushed up to his eyes. "Ah, I only teach it," he said.

In this way it was that Pierre Coquelin came to be my governor. My
father, who had a mortal dislike to all kinds of cogitation and inquiry,
engaged him on the simple testimony of his face and of his own account
of his talents. His history, as he told it, was in three words as
follows: He was of our province, and neither more nor less than the son
of a village tailor. He is my hero: _tirez-vous de là._ Showing a
lively taste for books, instead of being promoted to the paternal bench,
he had been put to study with the Jesuits. After a residence of some
three years with these gentlemen, he had incurred their displeasure by a
foolish breach of discipline, and had been turned out into the world.
Here he had endeavored to make capital out of his excellent education,
and had gone up to Paris with the hope of earning his bread as a
scribbler. But in Paris he scribbled himself hungry and nothing more,
and was in fact in a fair way to die of starvation. At last he
encountered an agent of the Marquis de Rochambeau, who was collecting
young men for the little army which the latter was prepared to conduct
to the aid of the American insurgents. He had engaged himself among
Rochambeau's troops, taken part in several battles, and finally received
a wound in his leg of which the effect was still perceptible. At the end
of three years he had returned to France, and repaired on foot, with
what speed he might, to his native town; but only to find that in his
absence his father had died, after a tedious illness, in which he had
vainly lavished his small earnings upon the physicians, and that his
mother had married again, very little to his taste. Poor Coquelin was
friendless, penniless, and homeless. But once back on his native soil,
he found himself possessed again by his old passion for letters, and,
like: all starving members of his craft, he had turned his face to
Paris. He longed to make up for his three years in the wilderness. He
trudged along, lonely, hungry, and weary, till he came to the gates of
Bergerac. Here, sitting down to rest on a stone, he saw us come out on
the terrace to digest our breakfast in the sun. Poor Coquelin! he had
the stomach of a gentleman. He was filled with an irresistible longing
to rest awhile from his struggle with destiny, and it seemed to him that
for a mess of smoking pottage he would gladly exchange his vague and
dubious future. In obedience to this simple impulse,--an impulse
touching in its humility, when you knew the man,--he made his way up the
avenue. We looked affable enough,--an honest country gentleman, a young
girl playing with a crow, and a little boy eating bread and butter; and
it turned out, we were as kindly as we looked.

For me, I soon grew extremely fond of him, and I was glad to think in
later days that he had found me a thoroughly docile child. In those
days, you know, thanks to Jean Jacques Rousseau, there was a vast stir
in men's notions of education, and a hundred theories afloat about the
perfect teacher and the perfect pupil. Coquelin was a firm devotee of
Jean Jacques, and very possibly applied some of his precepts to my own
little person. But of his own nature Coquelin was incapable of anything
that was not wise and gentle, and he had no need to learn humanity in
books. He was, nevertheless, a great reader, and when he had not a
volume in his hand he was sure to have two in his pockets. He had half a
dozen little copies of the Greek and Latin poets, bound in yellow
parchment, which, as he said, with a second shirt and a pair of white
stockings, constituted his whole library. He had carried these books to
America, and read them in the wilderness, and by the light of
camp-fires, and in crowded, steaming barracks in winter-quarters. He had
a passion for Virgil. M. Scarron was very soon dismissed to the
cupboard, among the dice-boxes and the old packs of cards, and I was
confined for the time to Virgil and Ovid and Plutarch, all of which,
with the stimulus of Coquelin's own delight, I found very good reading.
But better than any of the stories I read were those stories of his
wanderings, and his odd companions and encounters, and charming tales of
pure fantasy, which, with the best grace in the world, he would recite
by the hour. We took long walks, and he told me the names of the flowers
and the various styles of the stars, and I remember that I often had no
small trouble to keep them distinct. He wrote a very bad hand, but he
made very pretty drawings of the subjects then in vogue,--nymphs and
heroes and shepherds and pastoral scenes. I used to fancy that his
knowledge and skill were inexhaustible, and I pestered him so for
entertainment that I certainly proved that there were no limits to his
patience.

When he first came to us he looked haggard and thin and weary; but
before the month was out, he had acquired a comfortable rotundity of
person, and something of the sleek and polished look which befits the
governor of a gentleman's son. And yet he never lost a certain gravity
and reserve of demeanor which was nearly akin to a mild melancholy. With
me, half the time, he was of course intolerably bored, and he must have
had hard work to keep from yawning in my face,--which, as he knew I
knew, would have been an unwarrantable liberty. At table, with my
parents, he seemed to be constantly observing himself and inwardly
regulating his words and gestures. The simple truth, I take it, was that
he had never sat at a gentleman's table, and although he must have known
himself incapable of a real breach of civility,--essentially delicate as
he was in his feelings,--he was too proud to run the risk of violating
etiquette. My poor mother was a great stickler for ceremony, and she
would have had her majordomo to lift the covers, even if she had had
nothing to put into the dishes. I remember a cruel rebuke she bestowed
upon Coquelin, shortly after his arrival. She could never be brought to
forget that he had been picked up, as she said, on the roads. At dinner
one day, in the absence of Mlle. de Bergerac, who was indisposed, he
inadvertently occupied her seat, taking me as a _vis-à-vis_ instead of
a neighbor. Shortly afterwards, coming to offer wine to my mother, he
received for all response a stare so blank, cold, and insolent as to
leave no doubt of her estimate of his presumption. In my mother's simple
philosophy, Mlle. de Bergerac's seat could be decently occupied only
herself, and in default of her presence should remain conspicuously and
sacredly vacant. Dinner at Bergerac was at best, indeed, a cold and
dismal ceremony. I see it now,--the great dining-room, with its high
windows and their faded curtains, and the tiles upon the floor, and the
immense wainscots, and the great white marble chimney-piece, reaching to
the ceiling,--a triumph of delicate carving,--and the panels above the
doors, with their _galant_ mythological paintings. All this had been the
work of my grandfather, during the Regency, who had undertaken to
renovate and beautify the château; but his funds had suddenly given
out, and we could boast but a desultory elegance. Such talk as passed at
table was between my mother and the Baron, and consisted for the most
part of a series of insidious attempts on my mother's part to extort
information which the latter had no desire, or at least no faculty, to
impart. My father was constitutionally taciturn and apathetic, and he
invariably made an end of my mother's interrogation by proclaiming that
he hated gossip. He liked to take his pleasure and have done with it, or
at best, to ruminate his substantial joys within the conservative
recesses of his capacious breast. The Baronne's inquisitive tongue was
like a lambent flame, flickering over the sides of a rock. She had a
passion for the world, and seclusion had only sharpened the edge of her
curiosity. She lived on old memories--shabby, tarnished bits of
intellectual finery--and vagrant rumors, anecdotes, and scandals.

Once in a while, however, her curiosity held high revel; for once a week
we had the Vicomte de Treuil to dine with us. This gentleman was,
although several years my father's junior, his most intimate friend and
the only constant visitor at Bergerac. He brought with him a sort of
intoxicating perfume of the great world, which I myself was not too
young to feel. He had a marvellous fluency of talk; he was polite and
elegant; and he was constantly getting letters from Paris, books,
newspapers, and prints, and copies of the new songs. When he dined at
Bergerac, my mother used to rustle away from table, kissing her hand to
him, and actually light-headed from her deep potations of gossip. His
conversation was a constant popping of corks. My father and the Vicomte,
as I have said, were firm friends,--the firmer for the great diversity
of their characters. M. de Bergerac was dark, grave, and taciturn, with
a deep, sonorous voice. He had in his nature a touch of melancholy, and,
in default of piety, a broad vein of superstition. The foundations of
his soul, moreover, I am satisfied, in spite of the somewhat ponderous
superstructure, were laid in a soil of rich tenderness and pity. Gaston
de Treuil was of a wholly different temper. He was short and slight,
without any color, and with eyes as blue and lustrous as sapphires. He
was so careless and gracious and mirthful, that to an unenlightened
fancy he seemed the model of a joyous, reckless, gallant, impenitent
_veneur._ But it sometimes struck me that, as he revolved an idea in his
mind, it produced a certain flinty ring, which suggested that his nature
was built, as it were, on rock, and that the bottom of his heart was
hard. Young as he was, besides, he had a tired, jaded, exhausted look,
which told of his having played high at the game of life, and, very
possibly, lost. In fact, it was notorious that M. de Treuil had run
through his property, and that his actual business in our neighborhood
was to repair the breach in his fortunes by constant attendance on a
wealthy kinsman, who occupied an adjacent château, and who was dying of
age and his infirmities. But while I thus hint at the existence in his
composition of these few base particles, I should be sorry to represent
him as substantially less fair and clear and lustrous than he appeared
to he. He possessed an irresistible charm, and that of itself is a
virtue. I feel sure, moreover, that my father would never have
reconciled himself to a real scantiness of masculine worth. The Vicomte
enjoyed, I fancy, the generous energy of my father's good-fellowship,
and the Baron's healthy senses were flattered by the exquisite perfume
of the other's infallible _savoir-vivre._ I offer a hundred apologies,
at any rate, to the Vicomte's luminous shade, that I should have
ventured to cast a dingy slur upon his name. History has commemorated
it. He perished on the scaffold, and showed that he knew how to die as
well as to live. He was the last relic of the lily-handed youth of the
_bon temps_; and as he looks at me out of the poignant sadness of the
past, with a reproachful glitter in his cold blue eyes, and a scornful
smile on his fine lips, I feel that, elegant and silent as he is, he has
the last word in our dispute. I shall think of him henceforth as he
appeared one night, or rather one morning, when he came home from a ball
with my father, who had brought him to Bergerac to sleep. I had my bed
in a closet out of my mother's room, where I lay in a most unwholesome
fashion among her old gowns and hoops and cosmetics. My mother slept
little; she passed the night in her dressing-gown, bolstered up in her
bed, reading novels. The two gentlemen came in at four o'clock in the
morning and made their way up to the Baronne's little sitting-room, next
to her chamber. I suppose they were highly exhilarated, for they made a
great noise of talking and laughing, and my father began to knock at the
chamber door. He called out that he had M. de Treuil, and that they were
cold and hungry. The Baronne said that she had a fire and they might
come in. She was glad enough, poor lady, to get news of the ball, and to
catch their impressions before they had been dulled by sleep. So they
came in and sat by the fire, and M. de Treuil looked for some wine and
some little cakes where my mother told him. I was wide awake and heard
it all. I heard my mother protesting and crying out, and the Vicomte
laughing, when he looked into the wrong place; and I am afraid that in
my mother's room there were a great many wrong places. Before long, in
my little stuffy, dark closet, I began to feel hungry too; whereupon I
got out of bed and ventured forth into the room. I remember the whole
picture, as one remembers isolated scenes of childhood: my mother's bed,
with its great curtains half drawn back at the side, and her little
eager face and dark eyes peeping out of the recess; then the two men at
the fire,--my father with his hat on, sitting and looking drowsily into
the flames, and the Vicomte standing before the hearth, talking,
laughing, and gesticulating, with the candlestick in one hand and a
glass of wine in the other,--dropping the wax on one side and the wine
on the other. He was dressed from head to foot in white velvet and white
silk, with embroideries of silver, and an immense _jabot._ He was very
pale, and he looked lighter and slighter and wittier and more elegant
than ever. He had a weak voice, and when he laughed, after one feeble
little spasm, it went off into nothing, and you only knew he was
laughing by his nodding his head and lifting his eyebrows and showing
his handsome teeth. My father was in crimson velvet, with tarnished gold
facings. My mother bade me get back into bed, but my father took me on
his knees and held out my bare feet to the fire. In a little while, from
the influence of the heat, he fell asleep in his chair, and I sat in my
place and watched M. de Treuil as he stood in the firelight drinking his
wine and telling stories to my mother, until at last I too relapsed into
the innocence of slumber. They were very good friends, the Vicomte and
my mother. He admired the turn of her mind. I remember his telling me
several years later, at the time of her death, when I was old enough to
understand him, that she was a very brave, keen little woman, and that
in her musty solitude of Bergerac she said a great many more good things
than the world ever heard of.


During the winter which preceded Coquelin's arrival, M. de Treuil used
to show himself at Bergerac in a friendly manner; but about a month
before this event, his visits became more frequent and assumed a special
import and motive. In a word, my father and his friend between them had
conceived it to be a fine thing that the latter should marry Mlle. de
Bergerac. Neither from his own nor from his friend's point of view was
Gaston de Treuil a marrying man or a desirable _parti._ He was too fond
of pleasure to conciliate a rich wife, and too poor to support a
penniless one. But I fancy that my father was of the opinion that if the
Vicomte came into his kinsman's property, the best way to insure
the preservation of it, and to attach him to his duties and
responsibilities, would be to unite him to an amiable girl, who might
remind him of the beauty of a domestic life and lend him courage to mend
his ways. As far as the Vicomte was concerned, this was assuredly a
benevolent scheme, but it seems to me that it made small account of the
young girl's own happiness. M. de Treuil was supposed, in the matter of
women, to have known everything that can be known, and to be as _blasé_
with regard to their charms as he was proof against their influence.
And, in fact, his manner of dealing with women, and of discussing them,
indicated a profound disenchantment,--no bravado of contempt, no
affectation of cynicism, but a cold, civil, absolute lassitude. A simply
charming woman, therefore, would never have served the purpose of my
father's theory. A very sound and liberal instinct led him to direct his
thoughts to his sister. There were, of course, various auxiliary reasons
for such disposal of Mlle. de Bergerac's hand. She was now a woman
grown, and she had as yet received no decent proposals. She had no
marriage portion of her own, and my father had no means to endow her.
Her beauty, moreover, could hardly be called a dowry. It was without
those vulgar allurements which, for many a poor girl, replace the
glitter of cash. If within a very few years more she had not succeeded
in establishing herself creditably in the world, nothing would be left
for her but to withdraw from it, and to pledge her virgin faith to the
chilly sanctity of a cloister. I was destined in the course of time to
assume the lordship and the slender revenues of Bergerac, and it was not
to be expected that I should be burdened on the very threshold of life
with the maintenance of a dowerless maiden aunt. A marriage with M. de
Treuil would be in all senses a creditable match, and, in the event of
his becoming his kinsman's legatee, a thoroughly comfortable one.

It was some time before the color of my father's intentions, and the
milder hue of the Vicomte's acquiescence, began to show in our common
daylight. It is not the custom, as you know, in our excellent France, to
admit a lover on probation. He is expected to make up his mind on a view
of the young lady's endowments, and to content himself before marriage
with the bare cognition of her face. It is not thought decent (and there
is certainly reason in it) that he should dally with his draught, and
hold it to the light, and let the sun play through it, before carrying
it to his lips. It was only on the ground of my father's warm good-will
to Gaston de Treuil, and the latter's affectionate respect for the
Baron, that the Vicomte was allowed to appear as a lover, before making
his proposals in form. M. de Treuil, in fact, proceeded gradually, and
made his approaches from a great distance. It was not for several weeks,
therefore, that Mlle. de Bergerac became aware of them. And now, as this
dear young girl steps into my story, where, I ask you, shall I find
words to describe the broad loveliness of her person, to hint at the
perfect beauty of her mind, to suggest the sweet mystery of her first
suspicion of being sought, from afar, in marriage? Not in my fancy,
surely; for there I should disinter the flimsy elements and tarnished
properties of a superannuated comic opera. My taste, my son, was formed
once for all fifty years ago. But if I wish to call up Mlle. de
Bergerac, I must turn to my earliest memories, and delve in the
sweet-smelling virgin soil of my heart. For Mlle. de Bergerac is no
misty sylphid nor romantic moonlit nymph. She rises before me now,
glowing with life, with the sound of her voice just dying in the
air,--the more living for the mark of her crimson death-stain.

There was every good reason why her dawning consciousness of M. de
Treuil's attentions--although these were little more than projected as
yet--should have produced a serious tremor in her heart. It was not that
she was aught of a coquette; I honestly believe that there was no latent
coquetry in her nature. At all events, whatever she might have become
after knowing M. de Treuil, she was no coquette to speak of in her
ignorance. Her ignorance of men, in truth, was great. For the Vicomte
himself, she had as yet known him only distantly, formally, as a
gentleman of rank and fashion; and for others of his quality, she had
seen but a small number, and not seen them intimately. These few words
suffice to indicate that my aunt led a life of unbroken monotony. Once a
year she spent six weeks with certain ladies of the Visitation, in whose
convent she had received her education, and of whom she continued to be
very fond. Half a dozen times in the twelvemonth she went to a hall,
under convoy of some haply ungrudging _châtelaine._ Two or three times
a month, she received a visit at Bergerac. The rest of the time she
paced, with the grace of an angel and the patience of a woman, the
dreary corridors and unclipt garden walks of Bergerac. The discovery,
then, that the brilliant Vicomte de Treuil was likely to make a proposal
for her hand was an event of no small importance. With precisely what
feelings she awaited its coming, I am unable to tell; but I have no
hesitation in saying that even at this moment (that is, in less than a
month after my tutor's arrival) her feelings were strongly modified by
her acquaintance with Pierre Coquelin.

The word "acquaintance" perhaps exaggerates Mlle. de Bergerac's relation
to this excellent young man. Twice a day she sat facing him at table,
and half a dozen times a week she met him on the staircase, in the
saloon, or in the park. Coquelin had been accommodated with an apartment
in a small untenanted pavilion, within the enclosure of our domain, and
except at meals, and when his presence was especially requested at the
château, he confined himself to his own precinct. It was there, morning
and evening, that I took my lesson. It was impossible, therefore, that
an intimacy should have arisen between these two young persons, equally
separated as they were by material and conventional barriers.
Nevertheless, as the sequel proved, Coquelin must, by his mere presence,
have begun very soon to exert a subtle action on Mlle. de Bergerac's
thoughts. As for the young girl's influence on Coquelin, it is my belief
that he fell in love with her the very first moment he beheld her,--that
morning when he trudged wearily up our avenue. I need certainly make no
apology for the poor fellow's audacity. You tell me that you fell in
love at first sight with my aunt's portrait; you will readily excuse the
poor youth for having been smitten with the original. It is less logical
perhaps, but it is certainly no less natural, that Mlle. de Bergerac
should have ventured to think of my governor as a decidedly interesting
fellow. She saw so few men that one the more or the less made a very
great difference. Coquelin's importance, moreover, was increased rather
than diminished by the fact that, as I may say, he was a son of the
soil. Marked as he was, in aspect and utterance, with the genuine
plebeian stamp, he opened a way for the girl's fancy into a vague,
unknown world. He stirred her imagination, I conceive, in very much the
same way as such a man as Gaston de Treuil would have stirred--actually
had stirred, of course--the grosser sensibilities of many a little
_bourgeoise._ Mlle. de Bergerac was so thoroughly at peace with the
consequences of her social position, so little inclined to derogate in
act or in thought from the perfect dignity of her birth, that with the
best conscience in the world, she entertained, as they came, the
feelings provoked by Coquelin's manly virtues and graces. She had been
educated in the faith that _noblesse oblige_, and she had seen none but
gentlefolks and peasants. I think that she felt a vague, unavowed
curiosity to see what sort of a figure you might make when you were
under no obligations to nobleness. I think, finally, that unconsciously
and in the interest simply of her unsubstantial dreams, (for in those
long summer days at Bergerac, without finery, without visits, music, or
books, or anything that a well-to-do grocer's daughter enjoys at the
present day, she must, unless she was a far greater simpleton than I
wish you to suppose, have spun a thousand airy, idle visions,) she
contrasted Pierre Coquelin with the Vicomte de Treuil. I protest that I
don't see how Coquelin bore the contrast. I frankly admit that, in her
place, I would have given all my admiration to the Vicomte. At all
events, the chief result of any such comparison must have been to show
how, in spite of real trials and troubles, Coquelin had retained a
certain masculine freshness and elasticity, and how, without any sorrows
but those of his own wanton making, the Vicomte had utterly rubbed off
his primal bloom of manhood. There was that about Gaston de Treuil that
reminded you of an actor by daylight. His little row of foot-lights had
burned itself out. But this is assuredly a more pedantic view of the
case than any that Mlle. de Bergerac was capable of taking. The Vicomte
had but to learn his part and declaim it, and the illusion was complete.

Mlle. de Bergerac may really have been a great simpleton, and my theory
of her feelings--vague and imperfect as it is--may be put together quite
after the fact. But I see you protest; you glance at the picture; you
frown. _C'est bon_; give me your hand. She received the Vicomte's
gallantries, then, with a modest, conscious dignity, and courtesied to
exactly the proper depth when he made her one of his inimitable bows.

One evening--it was, I think, about ten days after Coquelin's
arrival--she was sitting reading to my mother, who was ill in bed. The
Vicomte had been dining with us, and after dinner we had gone into the
drawing-room. At the drawing-room door Coquelin had made his bow to my
father, and carried me off to his own apartment. Mlle. de Bergerac and
the two gentlemen had gone into the drawing-room together. At dusk I had
come back to the château, and, going up to my mother, had found her in
company with her sister-in-law. In a few moments my father came in,
looking stern and black.

"Sister," he cried, "why did you leave us alone in the drawing-room?
Didn't you see I wanted you to stay?"

Mlle. de Bergerac laid down her book and looked at her brother before
answering. "I had to come to my sister," she said: "I couldn't leave her
alone."

My mother, I'm sorry to say, was not always just to my aunt. She used to
lose patience with her sister's want of coquetry, of ambition, of desire
to make much of herself. She divined wherein my aunt had offended.
"You're very devoted to your sister, suddenly," she said. "There are
duties and duties, mademoiselle. I'm very much obliged to you for
reading to me. You can put down the book."

"The Vicomte swore very hard when you went out," my father went on.

Mlle. de Bergerac laid aside her book. "Dear me!" she said, "if he was
going to swear, it's very well I went."

"Are you afraid of the Vicomte?" said my mother. "You're twenty-two
years old. You're not a little girl."

"Is she twenty-two?" cried my father. "I told him she was twenty-one."

"Frankly, brother," said Mlle. de Bergerac, "what does he want? Does he
want to marry me?"

My father stared a moment. "_Pardieu!_" he cried.

"She looks as if she didn't believe it," said my mother. "Pray, did you
ever ask him?"

"No, madam; did you? You are very kind." Mlle. de Bergerac was excited;
her cheeks flushed.

"In the course of time," said my father, gravely, "the Vicomte proposes
to demand your hand."

"What is he waiting for?" asked Mlle. de Bergerac, simply.

"_Fi donc, mademoiselle!_" cried my mother.

"He is waiting for M. de Sorbières to die," said I, who had got this
bit of news from my mother's waiting-woman.

My father stared at me, half angrily; and then,--"He expects to
inherit," he said, boldly. "It's a very fine property."

"He would have done better, it seems to me," rejoined Mlle. de Bergerac,
after a pause, "to wait till he had actually come into possession of
it."

"M. de Sorbières," cried my father, "has given him his word a dozen
times over. Besides, the Vicomte loves you."

Mlle. de Bergerac blushed, with a little smile, and as she did so her
eyes fell on mine. I was standing gazing at her as a child gazes at a
familiar friend who is presented to him in a new light. She put out her
hand and drew me towards her. "The truth comes out of the mouths of
children," she said. "Chevalier, does he love me?"

"Stuff!" cried the Baronne; "one doesn't: speak to children of such
things. A young girl should believe what she's told. I believed my
mother when she told me that your brother loved me. He didn't, but I
believed it, and as far as I know I'm none the worse for it."

For ten days after this I heard nothing more of Mlle. de Bergerac's
marriage, and I suppose that, childlike, I ceased to think of what I had
already heard. One evening, about midsummer, M. de Treuil came over to
supper, and announced that he was about to set out in company with poor
M. de Sorbières for some mineral springs in the South, by the use of
which the latter hoped to prolong his life.

I remember that, while we sat at table, Coquelin was appealed to as an
authority upon some topic broached by the Vicomte, on which he found
himself at variance with my father. It was the first time, I fancy, that
he had been so honored and that his opinions had been deemed worth
hearing. The point under discussion must have related to the history of
the American War, for Coquelin spoke with the firmness and fulness
warranted by personal knowledge. I fancy that he was a little frightened
by the sound of his own voice, but he acquitted himself with perfect
good grace and success. We all sat attentive; my mother even staring a
little, surprised to find in a beggarly pedagogue a perfect beau diseur.
My father, as became so great a gentleman, knew by a certain rough
instinct when a man had something amusing to say. He leaned back, with
his hands in his pockets, listening and paying the poor fellow the
tribute of a half-puzzled frown. The Vicomte, like a man of taste, was
charmed. He told stories himself, he was a good judge.

After supper we went out on the terrace. It was a perfect summer night,
neither too warm nor too cool. There was no moon, but the stars flung
down their languid light, and the earth, with its great dark masses of
vegetation and the gently swaying tree-tops, seemed to answer back in a
thousand vague perfumes. Somewhere, close at hand, out of an enchanted
tree, a nightingale raved and carolled in delirious music. We had the
good taste to listen in silence. My mother sat down on a bench against
the house, and put out her hand and made my father sit beside her. Mlle.
de Bergerac strolled to the edge of the terrace, and leaned against the
balustrade, whither M. de Treuil soon followed her. She stood
motionless, with her head raised, intent upon the music. The Vicomte
seated himself upon the parapet, with his face towards her and his arms
folded. He may perhaps have been talking, under cover of the
nightingale. Coquelin seated himself near the other end of the terrace,
and drew me between his knees. At last the nightingale ceased. Coquelin
got up, and bade good night to the company, and made his way across the
park to his lodge. I went over to my aunt and the Vicomte.

"M. Coquelin is a clever man," said the Vicomte, as he disappeared down
the avenue. "He spoke very well this evening."

"He never spoke so much before," said I. "He's very shy."

"I think," said my aunt, "he's a little proud."

"I don't understand," said the Vicomte, "how a man with any pride can
put up with the place of a tutor. I had rather dig in the fields."

"The Chevalier is much obliged to you," said my aunt, laughing. "In
fact, M. Coquelin has to dig a little, hasn't he, Chevalier?"

"Not at all," said I. "But he keeps some plants in pots."

At this my aunt and the Vicomte began to laugh. "He keeps one precious
plant," cried my aunt, tapping my face with her fan.

At this moment my mother called me away. "He makes them laugh," I heard
her say to my father, as I went to her.

"She had better laugh about it than cry," said my father.

Before long, Mlle. de Bergerac and her companion came back toward the
house.

"M. le Vicomte, brother," said my aunt, "invites me to go down and walk
in the park. May I accept?"

"By all means," said my father. "You may go with the Vicomte as you
would go with me."

"Ah!" said the Vicomte.

"Come then, Chevalier," said my aunt. "In my turn, I invite you."

"My son," said the Baronne, "I forbid you."

"But my brother says," rejoined Mlle. de Bergerac, "that I may go with
M. de Treuil as I would go with himself. He would not object to my
taking my nephew." And she put out her hand.

"One would think," said my mother, "that you were setting out for
Siberia."

"For Siberia!" cried the Vicomte, laughing; "O no!"

I paused, undecided. But my father gave me a push. "After all," he said,
"it's better."

When I overtook my aunt and her lover, the latter, losing no time,
appeared to have come quite to the point.

"Your brother tells me, mademoiselle," he had begun, "that he has spoken
to you."

The young girl was silent.

"You may be indifferent," pursued the Vicomte, "but I can't believe
you're ignorant."

"My brother has spoken to me," said Mlle. de Bergerac at last, with an
apparent effort,--"my brother has spoken to me of his project."

"I'm very glad he seemed to you to have espoused my cause so warmly that
you call it his own. I did my best to convince him that I possess what a
person of your merit is entitled to exact of the man who asks her hand.
In doing so, I almost convinced myself. The point is now to convince
you."

"I listen."

"You admit, then, that your mind is not made up in advance against me."

"_Mon Dieu!_" cried my aunt, with some emphasis, "a poor girl like me
doesn't make up her mind. You frighten me, Vicomte. This is a serious
question. I have the misfortune to have no mother. I can only pray God.
But prayer helps me not to choose, but only to be resigned."

"Pray often, then, mademoiselle. I'm not an arrogant lover, and since I
have known you a little better, I have lost all my vanity. I'm not a
good man nor a wise one. I have no doubt you think me very light and
foolish, but you can't begin to know how light and foolish I am. Marry
me and you'll never know. If you don't marry me, I'm afraid you'll never
marry."

"You're very frank. Vicomte. If you think I'm afraid of never marrying,
you're mistaken. One can be very happy as an old maid. I spend six weeks
every year with the ladies of the Visitation. Several of them are
excellent women, charming women. They read, they educate young girls,
they visit the poor--"

The Vicomte broke into a laugh. "They get up at five o'clock in the
morning; they breakfast on boiled cabbage; they make flannel waistcoats,
and very good sweetmeats! Why do you talk so, mademoiselle? Why do you
say that you would like to lead such a life? One might almost believe it
is coquetry. _Tenez_, I believe it's ignorance,--ignorance of your own
feelings, your own nature, and your own needs." M. de Treuil paused a
moment, and, although I had a very imperfect notion of the meaning of
his words, I remember being struck with the vehement look of his pale
face, which seemed fairly to glow in the darkness. Plainly, he was in
love. "You are not made for solitude," he went on; "you are not made to
be buried in a dingy old château, in the depths of a ridiculous
province. You are made for the world, for the court, for pleasure, to be
loved, admired, and envied. No, you don't know yourself, nor does
Bergerac know you, nor his wife! I, at least, appreciate you. I blow
that you are supremely beautiful--"

"Vicomte," said Mlle. de Bergerac, "you forget--the child."

"Hang the child! Why did you bring him along? You are no child. You can
understand me. You are a woman, full of intelligence and goodness and
beauty. They don't know you here, they think you a little demoiselle in
pinafores. Before Heaven, mademoiselle, there is that about you,--I see
it, I feel it here at your side, in this rustling darkness--there is
that about you that a man would gladly die for."

Mlle. de Bergerac interrupted him with energy. "You talk extravagantly.
I don't understand you; you frighten me."

"I talk as I feel. I frighten you? So much the better. I wish to stir
your heart and get some answer to the passion of my own."

Mlle. de Bergerac was silent a moment, as if collecting her thoughts.
"If I talk with you on this subject, I must do it with my wits about
me," she said at last. "I must know exactly what we each mean."

"It's plain then that I can't hope to inspire you with any degree of
affection."

"One doesn't promise to love, Vicomte; I can only answer for the
present. My heart is so full of good wishes toward you that it costs me
comparatively little to say I don't love you."

"And anything I may say of my own feelings will make no difference to
you?"

"You have said you love me. Let it rest there."

"But you look as if you doubted my word."

"You can't see how I look; Vicomte, I believe you."

"Well then, there is one point gained. Let us pass to the others. I'm
thirty years old. I have a very good name and a very bad reputation. I
honestly believe that, though I've fallen below my birth, I've kept
above my fame. I believe that I have no vices of temper; I'm neither
brutal, nor jealous, nor miserly. As for my fortune, I'm obliged to
admit that it consists chiefly in my expectations. My actual property is
about equal to your brother's and you know how your sister-in-law is
obliged to live. My expectations are thought particularly good. My
great-uncle, M. de Sorbières, possesses, chiefly in landed estates, a
fortune of some three millions of livres. I have no important
competitors, either in blood or devotion. He is eighty-seven years old
and paralytic, and within the past year I have been laying siege to his
favor with such constancy that his surrender, like his extinction, is
only a question of time. I received yesterday a summons to go with him
to the Pyrenees, to drink certain medicinal waters. The least he can do,
on my return, is to make me a handsome allowance, which with my own
revenues will make--_en attendant_ better things--a sufficient income
for a reasonable couple."

There was a pause of some moments, during which we slowly walked along
in the obstructed starlight, the silence broken only by the train of my
aunt's dress brushing against the twigs and pebbles.

"What a pity," she said, at last, "that you are not able to speak of all
this good fortune as in the present rather than in the future."

"There it is! Until I came to know you, I had no thoughts of marriage.
What did I want of wealth? If five years ago I had foreseen this moment,
I should stand here with something better than promises."

"Well, Vicomte," pursued the young girl, with singular composure, "you
do me the honor to think very well of me: I hope you will not be vexed
to find that prudence is one of my virtues. If I marry, I wish to marry
well. It's not only the husband, but the marriage that counts. In
accepting you as you stand, I should make neither a sentimental match
nor a brilliant one."

"Excellent. I love you, prudence and all. Say, then, that I present
myself here three months hence with the titles and tokens of property
amounting to a million and a half of livres, will you consider that I am
a _parti_ sufficiently brilliant to make you forget that you don't love
me?"

"I should never forget that."

"Well, nor I either. It makes a sort of sorrowful harmony! If three
months hence, I repeat, I offer you a fortune instead of this poor empty
hand, will you accept the one for the sake of the other?"

My aunt stopped short in the path. "I hope, Vicomte," she said, with
much apparent simplicity, "that you are going to do nothing indelicate."

"God forbid, mademoiselle! It shall be a clean hand and a clean
fortune."

"If you ask then a promise, a pledge--"

"You'll not give it. I ask then only for a little hope. Give it in what
form you will."

We walked a few steps farther and came out from among the shadows,
beneath the open sky. The voice of M. de Treuil, as he uttered these
words, was low and deep and tender and full of entreaty. Mlle. de
Bergerac cannot but have been deeply moved. I think she was somewhat
awe-struck at having called up such a force of devotion in a nature
deemed cold and inconstant. She put out her hand. "I wish success to any
honorable efforts. In any case you will be happier for your wealth. In
one case it will get you a wife, and in the other it will console you."

"Console me! I shall hate it, despise it, and throw it into the sea!"

Mlle. de Bergerac had no intention, of course, of leaving her companion
under an illusion. "Ah, but understand. Vicomte," she said, "I make no
promise. My brother claims the right to bestow my hand. If he wishes our
marriage now, of course he will wish it three months hence. I have never
gainsaid him."

"From now to three months a great deal may happen."

"To you, perhaps, but not to me."

"Are you going to your friends of the Visitation?"

"No, indeed. I have no wish to spend the summer in a cloister. I prefer
the green fields."

"Well, then _va_ for the green fields! They're the next best thing. I
recommend you to the Chevalier's protection."

We had made half the circuit of the park, and turned into an alley which
stretched away towards the house, and about midway in its course
separated into two paths, one leading to the main avenue, and the other
to the little pavilion inhabited by Coquelin. At the point where the
alley was divided stood an enormous oak of great circumference, with a
circular bench surrounding its trunk. It occupied, I believe, the
central point of the whole domain. As we reached the oak, I looked down
along the footpath towards the pavilion, and saw Coquelin's light
shining in one of the windows. I immediately proposed that we should pay
him a visit. My aunt objected, on the ground that he was doubtless busy
and would not thank us for interrupting him. And then, when I insisted,
she said it was not proper.

"How not proper?"

"It's not proper for me. A lady doesn't visit young men in their own
apartments."

At this the Vicomte cried out. He was partly amused, I think, at my
aunt's attaching any compromising power to poor little Coquelin, and
partly annoyed at her not considering his own company, in view of his
pretensions, a sufficient guaranty.

"I should think," he said, "that with the Chevalier and me you might
venture--"

"As you please, then," said my aunt. And I accordingly led the way to my
governor's abode.

It was a small edifice of a single floor, standing prettily enough among
the trees, and still habitable, although very much in disrepair. It had
been built by that same ancestor to whom Bergerac was indebted, in the
absence of several of the necessities of life, for many of its elegant
superfluities, and had been designed, I suppose, as a scene of
pleasure,--such pleasure as he preferred to celebrate elsewhere than
beneath the roof of his domicile. Whether it had ever been used I know
not; but it certainly had very little of the look of a pleasure-house.
Such furniture as it had once possessed had long since been transferred
to the needy saloons of the château, and it now looked dark and bare
and cold. In front, the shrubbery had been left to grow thick and wild
and almost totally to exclude the light from the windows; but behind,
outside of the two rooms which he occupied, and which had been provided
from the château with the articles necessary for comfort, Coquelin had
obtained my father's permission to effect a great clearance in the
foliage, and he now enjoyed plenty of sunlight and a charming view of
the neighboring country. It was in the larger of these two rooms,
arranged as a sort of study, that we found him.

He seemed surprised and somewhat confused by our visit, but he very soon
recovered himself sufficiently to do the honors of his little
establishment.

"It was an idea of my nephew," said Mlle. de Bergerac. "We were walking
in the park, and he saw your light. Now that we are here, Chevalier,
what would you have us do?"

"M. Coquelin has some very pretty things to show you," said I.

Coquelin turned very red. "Pretty things, Chevalier? Pray, what do you
mean? I have some of your nephew's copy-books," he said, turning to my
aunt.

"Nay, you have some of your own," I cried. "He has books full of
drawings, made by himself."

"Ah, you draw?" said the Vicomte.

"M. le Chevalier does me the honor to think so. My drawings are meant
for no critics but children."

"In the way of criticism," said my aunt, gently, "we too are children."
Her beautiful eyes, as she uttered these words, must have been quite as
gentle as her voice. Coquelin looked at her, thinking very modestly of
his little pictures, but loth to refuse the first request she had ever
made him.

"Show them, at any rate," said the Vicomte, in a somewhat peremptory
tone. In those days, you see, a man occupying Coquelin's place was
expected to hold all his faculties and talents at the disposal of his
patron, and it was thought an unwarrantable piece of assumption that he
should cultivate any of the arts for his own peculiar delectation. In
withholding his drawings, therefore, it may have seemed to the Vicomte
that Coquelin was unfaithful to the service to which he was held,--that,
namely, of instructing, diverting, and edifying the household of
Bergerac. Coquelin went to a little cupboard in the wall, and took out
three small albums and a couple of portfolios. Mlle. de Bergerac sat
down at the table, and Coquelin drew up the lamp and placed his drawings
before her. He turned them over, and gave such explanations as seemed
necessary. I have only my childish impressions of the character of these
sketches, which, in my eyes, of course, seemed prodigiously clever. What
the judgment of my companions was worth I know not, but they appeared
very well pleased. The Vicomte probably knew a good sketch from a poor
one, and he very good-naturedly pronounced my tutor an extremely knowing
fellow. Coquelin had drawn anything and everything,--peasants and dumb
brutes, landscapes and Parisian types and figures, taken indifferently
from high and low life. But the best pieces in the collection were a
series of illustrations and reminiscences of his adventures with the
American army, and of the figures and episodes he had observed in the
Colonies. They were for the most part rudely enough executed, owing to
his want of time and materials, but they were full of _finesse_ and
character. M. de Treuil was very much amused at the rude equipments of
your ancestors. There were sketches of the enemy too, whom Coquelin had
apparently not been afraid to look in the face. While he was turning
over these designs for Mlle. de Bergerac, the Vicomte took up one of his
portfolios, and, after a short inspection, drew from it, with a cry of
surprise, a large portrait in pen and ink.

"_Tiens!_" said I; "it's my aunt!"

Coquelin turned pale. Mlle. de Bergerac looked at him, and turned the
least bit red. As for the Vicomte, he never changed color. There was no
eluding the fact that it was a likeness, and Coquelin had to pay the
penalty of his skill.

"I didn't know," he said, at random, "that it was in that portfolio. Do
you recognize it, mademoiselle?"

"Ah," said the Vicomte, dryly, "M. Coquelin meant to hide it."

"It's too pretty to hide," said my aunt; "and yet it's too pretty to
show. It's flattered."

"Why should I have flattered you, mademoiselle?" asked Coquelin. "You
were never to see it."

"That's what it is, mademoiselle," said the Vicomte, "to have such
dazzling beauty. It penetrates the world. Who knows where you'll find it
reflected next?"

However pretty a compliment this may have been to Mlle. de Bergerac, it
was decidedly a back-handed blow to Coquelin. The young girl perceived
that he felt it.

She rose to her feet. "My beauty," she said, with a slight tremor in her
voice, "would be a small thing without M. Coquelin's talent. We are much
obliged to you. I hope that you'll bring your pictures to the château,
so that we may look at the rest."

"Are you going to leave him this?" asked M. de Treuil, holding up the
portrait.

"If M. Coquelin will give it to me, I shall be very glad to have it."

"One doesn't keep one's own portrait," said the Vicomte. "It ought to
belong to me." In those days, before the invention of our sublime
machinery for the reproduction of the human face, a young fellow was
very glad to have his mistress's likeness in pen and ink.

But Coquelin had no idea of contributing to the Vicomte's gallery.
"Excuse me," he said, gently, but looking the nobleman in the face. "The
picture isn't good enough for Mlle. de Bergerac, but it's too good for
any one else"; and he drew it out of the other's hands, tore it across,
and applied it to the flame of the lamp.

We went back to the château in silence. The drawing-room was empty; but
as we went in, the Vicomte took a lighted candle from a table and raised
it to the young girl's face. "_Parbleu!_" he exclaimed, "the vagabond
had looked at you to good purpose!"

Mlle. de Bergerac gave a half-confused laugh. "At any rate," she said,
"he didn't hold a candle to me as if I were my old smoke-stained
grandame, yonder!" and she blew out the light. "I'll call my brother,"
she said, preparing to retire.

"A moment," said her lover; "I shall not see you for some weeks. I shall
start to-morrow with my uncle. I shall think of you by day, and dream of
you by night. And meanwhile I shall very much doubt whether you think of
me."

Mlle. de Bergerac smiled. "Doubt, doubt. It will help you to pass the
time. With faith alone it would hang very heavy."

"It seems hard," pursued M. de Treuil, "that I should give you so many
pledges, and that you should give me none."

"I give all I ask."

"Then, for Heaven's sake, ask for something!"

"Your kind words are all I want."

"Then give me some kind word yourself."

"What shall I say. Vicomte?"

"Say,--say that you'll wait for me."

They were standing in the centre of the great saloon, their figures
reflected by the light of a couple of candles in the shining inlaid
floor. Mlle. de Bergerac walked away a few steps with a look of
agitation. Then turning about, "Vicomte," she asked, in a deep, full
voice, "do you truly love me?"

"Ah, Gabrielle!" cried the young man.

I take it that no woman can hear her baptismal name uttered for the
first time as that of Mlle. de Bergerac then came from her suitor's lips
without being thrilled with joy and pride.

"Well, M. de Treuil," she said, "I will wait for you."




PART II


I remember distinctly the incidents of that summer at Bergerac; or at
least its general character, its tone. It was a hot, dry season; we
lived with doors and windows open. M. Coquelin suffered very much from
the heat, and sometimes, for days together, my lessons were suspended.
We put our books away and rambled out for a long day in the fields. My
tutor was perfectly faithful; he never allowed me to wander beyond call.
I was very fond of fishing, and I used to sit for hours, like a little
old man, with my legs dangling over the bank of our slender river,
patiently awaiting the bite that so seldom came. Near at hand, in the
shade, stretched at his length on the grass, Coquelin read and re-read
one of his half dozen Greek and Latin poets. If we had walked far from
home, we used to go and ask for some dinner at the hut of a neighboring
peasant. For a very small coin we got enough bread and cheese and small
fruit to keep us over till supper. The peasants, stupid and squalid as
they were, always received us civilly enough, though on Coquelin's
account quite as much as on my own. He addressed them with an easy
familiarity, which made them feel, I suppose, that he was, if not quite
one of themselves, at least by birth and sympathies much nearer to them
than to the future Baron de Bergerac. He gave me in the course of these
walks a great deal of good advice; and without perverting my signorial
morals or instilling any notions that were treason to my rank and
position, he kindled in my childish breast a little democratic flame
which has never quite become extinct. He taught me the beauty of
humanity, justice, and tolerance; and whenever he detected me in a
precocious attempt to assert my baronial rights over the wretched little
_manants_ who crossed my path, he gave me morally a very hard drubbing. He
had none of the base complaisance and cynical nonchalance of the
traditional tutor of our old novels and comedies. Later in life I might
have found him too rigorous a moralist; but in those days I liked him
all the better for letting me sometimes feel the curb. It gave me a
highly agreeable sense of importance and a maturity. It was a tribute to
half-divined possibilities of naughtiness. In the afternoon, when I was
tired of fishing, he would lie with his thumb in his book and his eyes
half closed and tell me fairy-tales till the eyes of both of us closed
together. Do the instructors of youth nowadays condescend to the
fairy-tale pure and simple? Coquelin's stories belonged to the old, old
world: no political economy, no physics, no application to anything in
life. Do you remember in Doré's illustrations to Perrault's tales, the
picture of the enchanted castle of the Sleeping Beauty? Back in the
distance, in the bosom of an ancient park and surrounded by thick
baronial woods which blacken all the gloomy horizon, on the farther side
of a great abysmal hollow of tangled forest verdure, rise the long
façade, the moss-grown terraces, the towers, the purple roofs, of a
château of the time of Henry IV. Its massive foundations plunge far
down into the wild chasm of the woodland, and its cold pinnacles of
slate tower upwards, close to the rolling autumn clouds. The afternoon
is closing in and a chill October wind is beginning to set the forest
a-howling. In the foreground, on an elevation beneath a mighty oak,
stand a couple of old woodcutters pointing across into the enchanted
distance and answering the questions of the young prince. They are the
bent and blackened woodcutters of old France, of La Fontaine's Fables
and the _Médecin malgré lui._ What does the castle contain? What
secret is locked in its stately walls? What revel is enacted in its long
saloons? What strange figures stand aloof from its vacant windows? You
ask the question, and the answer is a long revery. I never look at the
picture without thinking of those summer afternoons in the woods and of
Coquelin's long stories. His fairies were the fairies of the _Grand
Siècle_, and his princes and shepherds the godsons of Perrault and
Madame d'Aulnay. They lived in such palaces and they hunted in such
woods.

Mlle. de Bergerac, to all appearance, was not likely to break her
promise to M. de Treuil,--for lack of the opportunity, quite as much as
of the will. Those bright summer days must have seemed very long to her,
and I can't for my life imagine what she did with her time. But she,
too, as she had told the Vicomte, was very fond of the green fields; and
although she never wandered very far from the house, she spent many an
hour in the open air. Neither here nor within doors was she likely to
encounter the happy man of whom the Vicomte might be jealous. Mlle. de
Bergerac had a friend, a single intimate friend, who came sometimes to
pass the day with her, and whose visits she occasionally returned. Marie
de Chalais, the granddaughter of the Marquis de Chalais, who lived some
ten miles away, was in all respects the exact counterpart and foil of my
aunt. She was extremely plain, but with that sprightly, highly seasoned
ugliness which is often so agreeable to men. Short, spare, swarthy,
light, with an immense mouth, a most impertinent little nose, an
imperceptible foot, a charming hand, and a delightful voice, she was, in
spite of her great name and her fine clothes, the very ideal of the old
stage soubrette. Frequently, indeed, in her dress and manner, she used
to provoke a comparison with this incomparable type. A cap, an apron,
and a short petticoat were all sufficient; with these and her bold, dark
eyes she could impersonate the very genius of impertinence and intrigue.
She was a thoroughly light creature, and later in life, after her
marriage, she became famous for her ugliness, her witticisms, and her
adventures; but that she had a good heart is shown by her real
attachment to my aunt. They were forever at cross-purposes, and yet they
were excellent friends. When my aunt wished to walk, Mlle. de Chalais
wished to sit still; when Mlle. de Chalais wished to laugh, my aunt
wished to meditate; when my aunt wished to talk piety, Mlle. de Chalais
wished to talk scandal. Mlle. de Bergerac, however, usually carried the
day and set the tune. There was nothing on earth that Marie de Chalais
so despised as the green fields; and yet you might have seen her a dozen
times that summer wandering over the domain of Bergerac, in a short
muslin dress and a straw hat, with her arm entwined about the waist of
her more stately friend. We used often to meet them, and as we drew near
Mlle. de Chalais would always stop and offer to kiss the Chevalier. By
this pretty trick Coquelin was subjected for a few moments to the
influence of her innocent _agaçeries_; for rather than have no man at
all to prick with the little darts of her coquetry, the poor girl would
have gone off and made eyes at the scare-crow in the wheat-field.
Coquelin was not at all abashed by her harmless advances; for although,
in addressing my aunt, he was apt to lose his voice or his countenance,
he often showed a very pretty wit in answering Mlle. de Chalais.

On one occasion she spent several days at Bergerac, and during her stay
she proffered an urgent entreaty that my aunt should go back with her to
her grandfather's house, where, having no parents, she lived with her
governess. Mlle. de Bergerac declined, on the ground of having no gowns
fit to visit in; whereupon Mlle. de Chalais went to my mother, begged
the gift of an old blue silk dress, and with her own cunning little
hands made it over for my aunt's figure. That evening Mlle. de Bergerac
appeared at supper in this renovated garment,--the first silk gown she
had ever worn. Mlle. de Chalais had also dressed her hair, and decked
her out with a number of trinkets and furbelows; and when the two came
into the room together, they reminded me of the beautiful Duchess in Don
Quixote, followed by a little dark-visaged Spanish waiting-maid. The
next morning Coquelin and I rambled off as usual in search of
adventures, and the day after that they were to leave the château.
Whether we met with any adventures or not I forget; but we found
ourselves at dinner-time at some distance from home, very hungry after a
long tramp. We directed our steps to a little roadside hovel, where we
had already purchased hospitality, and made our way in unannounced. We
were somewhat surprised at the scene that met our eyes.

On a wretched bed at the farther end of the hut lay the master of the
household, a young peasant whom we had seen a fortnight before in full
health and vigor. At the head of the bed stood his wife, moaning,
crying, and wringing her hands. Hanging about her, clinging to her
skirts, and adding their piping cries to her own lamentations, were four
little children, unwashed, unfed, and half clad. At the foot, facing the
dying man, knelt his old mother--a horrible hag, so bent and brown and
wrinkled with labor and age that there was nothing womanly left of her
but her coarse, rude dress and cap, nothing of maternity but her sobs.
Beside the pillow stood the priest, who had apparently just discharged
the last offices of the Church. On the other side, on her knees, with
the poor fellow's hand in her own, knelt Mlle. de Bergerac, like a
consoling angel. On a stool near the door, looking on from a distance,
sat Mlle. de Chalais, holding a little bleating kid in her arms. When
she saw us, she started up. "Ah, M. Coquelin!" she cried, "do persuade
Mlle. de Bergerac to leave this horrible place."

I saw Mlle. de Bergerac look at the curé and shake her head, as if to
say that it was all over. She rose from her knees and went round to the
wife, telling the same tale with her face. The poor, squalid _paysanne_
gave a sort of savage, stupid cry, and threw herself and her rags on the
young girl's neck. Mlle. de Bergerac caressed her, and whispered heaven
knows what divinely simple words of comfort. Then, for the first time,
she saw Coquelin and me, and beckoned us to approach.

"Chevalier," she said, still holding the woman on her breast, "have you
got any money?"

At these words the woman raised her head. I signified that I was
penniless.

My aunt frowned impatiently. "M. Coquelin, have you?"

Coquelin drew forth a single small piece, all that he possessed; for it
was the end of his month. Mlle. de Bergerac took it, and pursued her
inquiry.

"Curé, have you any money?"

"Not a sou," said the curé, smiling sweetly.

"Bah!" said Mlle. de Bergerac, with a sort of tragic petulance. "What
can I do with twelve sous?"

"Give it all the same," said the woman, doggedly, putting out her hand.

"They want money," said Mlle de Bergerac, lowering her voice to
Coquelin. "They have had this great sorrow, but a _louis d'or_ would
dull the wound. But we're all penniless. O for the sight of a little
gold!"

"I have a _louis_ at home," said I; and I felt Coquelin lay his hand on
my head.

"What was the matter with the husband?" he asked.

"_Mon Dieu!_" said my aunt, glancing round at the bed. "I don't know."

Coquelin looked at her, half amazed, half worshipping.

"Who are they, these people? What are they?" she asked.

"Mademoiselle," said Coquelin, fervently, "you're an angel!"

"I wish I were," said Mlle. de Bergerac, simply; and she turned to the
old mother.

We walked home together,--the curé with Mlle. de Chalais and me, and
Mlle. de Bergerac in front with Coquelin. Asking how the two young girls
had found their way to the deathbed we had just left, I learned from
Mlle. de Chalais that they had set out for a stroll together, and,
striking into a footpath across the fields, had gone farther than they
supposed, and lost their way. While they were trying to recover it, they
came upon the wretched hut where we had found them, and were struck by
the sight of two children, standing crying at the door. Mlle. de
Bergerac had stopped and questioned them to ascertain the cause of their
sorrow, which with some difficulty she found to be that their father was
dying of a fever. Whereupon, in spite of her companion's lively
opposition, she had entered the miserable abode, and taken her place at
the wretched couch, in the position in which we had discovered her. All
this, doubtless, implied no extraordinary merit on Mlle. de Bergerac's
part; but it placed her in a gracious, pleasing light.

The next morning the young girls went off in the great coach of M. de
Chalais, which had been sent for them overnight, my father riding along
as an escort. My aunt was absent a week, and I think I may say we keenly
missed her. When I say we, I mean Coquelin and I, and when I say
Coquelin and I, I mean Coquelin in particular; for it had come to this,
that my tutor was roundly in love with my aunt. I didn't know it then,
of course; but looking back, I see that he must already have been
stirred to his soul's depths. Young as I was, moreover, I believe that I
even then suspected his passion, and, loving him as I did, watched it
with a vague, childish awe and sympathy. My aunt was to me, of course, a
very old story, and I am sure she neither charmed nor dazzled my boyish
fancy. I was quite too young to apprehend the meaning or the
consequences of Coquelin's feelings; but I knew that he had a secret,
and I wished him joy of it. He kept so jealous a guard on it that I
would have defied my elders to discover the least reason for accusing
him; but with a simple child of ten, thinking himself alone and
uninterpreted, he showed himself plainly a lover. He was absent,
restless, preoccupied; now steeped in languid revery, now pacing up and
down with the exaltation of something akin to hope. Hope itself he could
never have felt; for it must have seemed to him that his passion was so
audacious as almost to be criminal. Mlle. de Bergerac's absence showed
him, I imagine, that to know her had been the event of his life; to see
her across the table, to hear her voice, her tread, to pass her, to meet
her eye, a deep, consoling, healing joy. It revealed to him the force
with which she had grasped his heart, and I think he was half frightened
at the energy of his passion.

One evening, while Mlle. de Bergerac was still away, I sat in his
window, committing my lesson for the morrow by the waning light. He was
walking up and down among the shadows. "Chevalier," said he, suddenly,
"what should you do if I were to leave you?"

My poor little heart stood still. "Leave me?" I cried, aghast; "why
should you leave me?"

"Why, you know I didn't come to stay forever."

"But you came to stay till I'm a man grown. Don't you like your place?"

"Perfectly."

"Don't you like my father?"

"Your father is excellent."

"And my mother?"

"Your mother is perfect."

"And me, Coquelin?"

"You, Chevalier, are a little goose."

And then, from a sort of unreasoned instinct that Mlle. de Bergerac was
somehow connected with his idea of going away, "And my aunt?" I added.

"How, your aunt?"

"Don't you like her?"

Coquelin had stopped in his walk, and stood near me and above me. He
looked at me some moments without answering, and then sat down beside me
in the window-seat, and laid his hand on my head.

"Chevalier," he said, "I will tell you something."

"Well?" said I, after I had waited some time.

"One of these days you will be a man grown, and I shall have left you
long before that. You'll learn a great many things that you don't know
now. You'll learn what a strange, vast world it is, and what strange
creatures men are--and women; how strong, how weak, how happy, how
unhappy. You'll learn how many feelings and passions they have, and what
a power of joy and of suffering. You'll be Baron de Bergerac and master
of the château and of this little house. You'll sometimes be very proud
of your title, and you'll sometimes feel very sad that it's so little
more than a bare title. But neither your pride nor your grief will come
to anything beside this, that one day, in the prime of your youth and
strength and good looks, you'll see a woman whom you will love more than
all these things,--more than your name, your lands, your youth, and
strength, and beauty. It happens to all men, especially the good ones,
and you'll be a good one. But the woman you love will be far out of your
reach. She'll be a princess, perhaps she'll be the Queen. How can a poor
little Baron de Bergerac expect her to look at him? You will give up
your life for a touch of her hand; but what will she care for your life
or your death? You'll curse your love, and yet you'll bless it, and
perhaps--not having your living to get--you'll come up here and shut
yourself up with your dreams and regrets. You'll come perhaps into this
pavilion, and sit here alone in the twilight. And then, my child, you'll
remember this evening; that I foretold it all and gave you my blessing
in advance and--kissed you." He bent over, and I felt his burning lips
on my forehead.

I understood hardly a word of what he said; but whether it was that I
was terrified by his picture of the possible insignificance of a Baron
de Bergerac, or that I was vaguely overawed by his deep, solemn tones, I
know not; but my eyes very quietly began to emit a flood of tears. The
effect of my grief was to induce him to assure me that he had no present
intention of leaving me. It was not, of course, till later in life,
that, thinking over the situation, I understood his impulse to arrest
his hopeless passion for Mlle. de Bergerac by immediate departure. He
was not brave in time.

At the end of a week she returned one evening as we were at supper. She
came in with M. de Chalais, an amiable old man, who had been so kind as
to accompany her. She greeted us severally, and nodded to Coquelin. She
talked, I remember, with great volubility, relating what she had seen
and done in her absence, and laughing with extraordinary freedom. As we
left the table, she took my hand, and I put out the other and took
Coquelin's.

"Has the Chevalier been a good boy?" she asked.

"Perfect," said Coquelin; "but he has wanted his aunt sadly."

"Not at all," said I, resenting the imputation as derogatory to my
independence.

"You have had a pleasant week, mademoiselle?" said Coquelin.

"A charming week. And you?"

"M. Coquelin has been very unhappy," said I. "He thought of going away."

"Ah?" said my aunt.

Coquelin was silent.

"You think of going away?"

"I merely spoke of it, mademoiselle. I must go away some time, you know.
The Chevalier looks upon me as something eternal."

"What's eternal?" asked the Chevalier.

"There is nothing eternal, my child," said Mlle. de Bergerac. "Nothing
lasts more than a moment."

"O," said Coquelin, "I don't agree with you!"

"You don't believe that in this world everything is vain and fleeting
and transitory?"

"By no means; I believe in the permanence of many things."

"Of what, for instance?"

"Well, of sentiments and passions."

"Very likely. But not of the hearts that hold them. 'Lovers die, but
love survives.' I heard a gentleman say that at Chalais."

"It's better, at least, than if he had put it the other way. But lovers
last too. They survive; they outlive the things that would fain destroy
them,--indifference, denial, and despair."

"But meanwhile the loved object disappears. When it isn't one, it's the
other."

"O, I admit that it's a shifting world. But I have a philosophy for
that."

"I'm curious to know your philosophy."

"It's a very old one. It's simply to make the most of life while it
lasts. I'm very fond of life," said Coquelin, laughing.

"I should say that as yet, from what I know of your history, you have
had no great reason to be."

"Nay, it's like a cruel mistress," said Coquelin. "When once you love
her, she's absolute. Her hard usage doesn't affect you. And certainly I
have nothing to complain of now."

"You're happy here then?"

"Profoundly, mademoiselle, in spite of the Chevalier."

"I should suppose that with your tastes you would prefer something more
active, more ardent."

"_Mon Dieu_, my tastes are very simple. And then--happiness, _cela ne se
raisonne pas._ You don't find it when you go in quest of it. It's like
fortune; it comes to you in your sleep."

"I imagine," said Mlle. de Bergerac, "that I was never happy."

"That's a sad story," said Coquelin.

The young girl began to laugh. "And never unhappy."

"Dear me, that's still worse. Never fear, it will come."

"What will come?"

"That which is both bliss and misery at once."

Mlle. de Bergerac hesitated a moment. "And what is this strange thing?"
she asked.

On his side Coquelin was silent. "When it comes to you," he said, at
last, "you'll tell me what you call it."

About a week after this, at breakfast, in pursuance of an urgent request
of mine, Coquelin proposed to my father to allow him to take me to visit
the ruins of an ancient feudal castle some four leagues distant, which
he had observed and explored while he trudged across the country on his
way to Bergerac, and which, indeed, although the taste for ruins was at
that time by no means so general as since the Revolution (when one may
say it was in a measure created), enjoyed a certain notoriety throughout
the province. My father good-naturedly consented; and as the distance
was too great to be achieved on foot, he placed his two old coach-horses
at our service. You know that although I affected, in boyish sort, to
have been indifferent to my aunt's absence, I was really very fond of
her, and it occurred to me that our excursion would be more solemn and
splendid for her taking part in it. So I appealed to my father and asked
if Mlle. de Bergerac might be allowed to go with us. What the Baron
would have decided had he been left to himself I know not; but happily
for our cause my mother cried out that, to her mind, it was highly
improper that her sister-in-law should travel twenty miles alone with
two young men.

"One of your young men is a child," said my father, "and her nephew into
the bargain; and the other,"--and he laughed, coarsely but not
ill-humoredly,--"the other is--Coquelin!"

"Coquelin is not a child nor is mademoiselle either," said my mother.

"All the more reason for their going, Gabrielle, will you go?" My
father, I fear, was not remarkable in general for his tenderness or his
_prévenance_ for the poor girl whom fortune had given him to protect;
but from time to time he would wake up to a downright sense of kinship
and duty, kindled by the pardonable aggressions of my mother, between
whom and her sister-in-law there existed a singular antagonism of
temper.

Mlle. de Bergerac looked at my father intently and with a little blush.
"Yes, brother. I'll go. The Chevalier can take me _en croupe._"

So we started, Coquelin on one horse, and I on the other, with my aunt
mounted behind me. Our sport for the first part of the journey consisted
chiefly in my urging my beast into a somewhat ponderous gallop, so as to
terrify my aunt, who was not very sure of her seat, and who, at moments,
between pleading and laughing, had hard work to preserve her balance. At
these times Coquelin would ride close alongside of us, at the same
cumbersome pace, declaring himself ready to catch the young girl if she
fell. In this way we jolted along, in a cloud of dust, with shouts and
laughter.

"Madame the Baronne was wrong," said Coquelin, "in denying that we are
children."

"O, this is nothing yet," cried my aunt.

The castle of Fossy lifted its dark and crumbling towers with a decided
air of feudal arrogance from the summit of a gentle eminence in the
recess of a shallow gorge among the hills. Exactly when it had
flourished and when it had decayed I knew not, but in the year of grace
of our pilgrimage it was a truly venerable, almost a formidable, ruin.
Two great towers were standing,--one of them diminished by half its
upper elevation, and the other sadly scathed and shattered, but still
exposing its hoary head to the weather, and offering the sullen
hospitality of its empty skull to a colony of swallows. I shall never
forget that day at Fossy; it was one of those long raptures of childhood
which seem to imprint upon the mind an ineffaceable stain of light. The
novelty and mystery of the dilapidated fortress,--its antiquity, its
intricacy, its sounding vaults and corridors, its inaccessible heights
and impenetrable depths, the broad sunny glare of its grass-grown courts
and yards, the twilight of its passages and midnight of its dungeons,
and along with all this my freedom to rove and scramble, my perpetual
curiosity, my lusty absorption of the sun-warmed air, and the contagion
of my companions' careless and sensuous mirth,--all these things
combined to make our excursion one of the memorable events of my youth.
My two companions accepted the situation and drank in the beauty of the
day and the richness of the spot with all my own reckless freedom.
Coquelin was half mad with the joy of spending a whole unbroken summer's
day with the woman whom he secretly loved. He was all motion and humor
and resonant laughter; and yet intermingled with his random gayety there
lurked a solemn sweetness and reticence, a feverish concentration of
thought, which to a woman with a woman's senses must have fairly
betrayed his passion. Mlle. de Bergerac, without quite putting aside her
natural dignity and gravity of mien, lent herself with a charming
girlish energy to the undisciplined spirit of the hour.

Our first thoughts, after Coquelin had turned the horses to pasture in
one of the grassy courts of the castle, were naturally bestowed upon our
little basket of provisions; and our first act was to sit down on a heap
of fallen masonry and divide its contents. After that we wandered. We
climbed the still practicable staircases, and wedged ourselves into the
turrets and strolled through the chambers and halls; we started from
their long repose every echo and bat and owl within the innumerable
walls.

Finally, after we had rambled a couple of hours, Mlle. de Bergerac
betrayed signs of fatigue. Coquelin went with her in search of a place
of rest, and I was left to my own devices. For an hour I found plenty of
diversion, at the end of which I returned to my friends. I had some
difficulty in finding them. They had mounted by an imperfect and
somewhat perilous ascent to one of the upper platforms of the castle.
Mlle. de Bergerac was sitting in a listless posture on a block of stone,
against the wall, in the shadow of the still surviving tower; opposite,
in the light, half leaning, half sitting on the parapet of the terrace,
was her companion.

"For the last half-hour, mademoiselle," said Coquelin, as I came up,
"you've not spoken a word."

"All the morning," said Mlle. de Bergerac, "I've been scrambling and
chattering and laughing. Now, by reaction, I'm _triste._"

"I protest, so am I," said Coquelin. "The truth is, this old feudal
fortress is a decidedly melancholy spot. It's haunted with the ghost of
the past. It smells of tragedies, sorrows, and cruelties." He uttered
these words with singular emphasis. "It's a horrible place," he pursued,
with a shudder.

Mlle. de Bergerac began to laugh. "It's odd that we should only just now
have discovered it!"

"No, it's like the history of that abominable past of which it's a
relic. At the first glance we see nothing but the great proportions, the
show, and the splendor; but when we come to explore, we detect a vast
underground world of iniquity and suffering. Only half this castle is
above the soil; the rest is dungeons and vaults and _oubliettes._"

"Nevertheless," said the young girl, "I should have liked to live in
those old days. Shouldn't you?"

"Verily, no, mademoiselle!" And then after a pause, with a certain
irrepressible bitterness: "Life is hard enough now."

Mlle. de Bergerac stared but said nothing.

"In those good old days," Coquelin resumed, "I should have been a
brutal, senseless peasant, yoked down like an ox, with my forehead in
the soil. Or else I should have been a trembling, groaning, fasting
monk, moaning my soul away in the ecstasies of faith."

Mlle. de Bergerac rose and came to the edge of the platform. "Was no
other career open in those days?"

"To such a one as me,--no. As I say, mademoiselle, life is hard now, but
it was a mere dead weight then. I know it was. I feel in my bones and
pulses that awful burden of despair under which my wretched ancestors
struggled. _Tenez_, I'm the great man of the race. My father came next;
he was one of four brothers, who all thought it a prodigious rise in the
world when he became a village tailor. If we had lived five hundred
years ago, in the shadow of these great towers, we should never have
risen at all. We should have stuck with our feet in the clay. As I'm not
a fighting man, I suppose I should have gone into the Church. If I
hadn't died from an overdose of inanition, very likely I might have
lived to be a cardinal."

Mlle. de Bergerac leaned against the parapet, and with a meditative
droop of the head looked down the little glen toward the plain and the
highway. "For myself," she said, "I can imagine very charming things of
life in this castle of Fossy."

"For yourself, very likely."

"Fancy the great moat below filled with water and sheeted with lilies,
and the drawbridge lowered, and a company of knights riding into the
gates. Within, in one of those vaulted, quaintly timbered rooms, the
châtelaine stands ready to receive them, with her women, her chaplain,
her physician, and her little page. They come clanking up the staircase,
with ringing swords, sweeping the ground with their plumes. They are all
brave and splendid and fierce, but one of them far more than the rest.
They each bend a knee to the lady--"

"But he bends two," cried Coquelin. "They wander apart into one of those
deep embrasures and spin the threads of perfect love. Ah, I could fancy
a sweet life, in those days, mademoiselle, if I could only fancy myself
a knight!"

"And you can't," said the young girl, gravely, looking at him.

"It's an idle game; it's not worth trying."

"Apparently then, you're a cynic; you have an equally small opinion of
the past and the present."

"No; you do me injustice."

"But you say that life is hard."

"I speak not for myself, but for others; for my brothers and sisters and
kinsmen in all degrees; for the great mass of petits gens of my own
class."

"Dear me, M. Coquelin, while you're about it, you can speak for others
still; for poor portionless girls, for instance."

"Are they very much to be pitied?"

Mlle. de Bergerac was silent. "After all," she resumed, "they oughtn't
to complain."

"Not when they have a great name and beauty," said Coquelin.

"O heaven!" said the young girl, impatiently, and turned away. Coquelin
stood watching her, his brow contracted, his lips parted. Presently, she
came back. "Perhaps you think," she said, "that I care for my name,--my
great name, as you call it."

"Assuredly, I do."

She stood looking at him, blushing a little and frowning. As he said
these words, she gave an impatient toss of the head and turned away
again. In her hand she carried an ornamented fan, an antiquated and
sadly dilapidated instrument. She suddenly raised it above her head,
swung it a moment, and threw it far across the parapet. "There goes the
name of Bergerac!" she said; and sweeping round, made the young man a
very low courtesy.

There was in the whole action a certain passionate freedom which set
poor Coquelin's heart a-throbbing. "To have a good name, mademoiselle,"
he said, "and to be indifferent to it, is the sign of a noble mind." (In
parenthesis, I may say that I think he was quite wrong.)

"It's quite as noble, monsieur," returned my aunt, "to have a small name
and not to blush for it."

With these words I fancy they felt as if they had said enough; the
conversation was growing rather too pointed.

"I think," said my aunt, "that we had better prepare to go." And she
cast a farewell glance at the broad expanse of country which lay
stretched out beneath us, striped with the long afternoon shadows.

Coquelin followed the direction of her eyes. "I wish very much," he
said, "that before we go we might be able to make our way up into the
summit of the great tower. It would be worth the attempt. The view from
here, charming as it is, must be only a fragment of what you see from
that topmost platform."

"It's not likely," said my aunt, "that the staircase is still in a state
to be used."

"Possibly not; but we can see."

"Nay," insisted my aunt, "I'm afraid to trust the Chevalier. There are
great breaches in the sides of the ascent, which are so many open doors
to destruction."

I strongly opposed this view of the case; but Coquelin, after scanning
the elevation of the tower and such of the fissures as were visible from
our standpoint, declared that my aunt was right and that it was my duty
to comply. "And you, too, mademoiselle," he said, "had better not try
it, unless you pride yourself on your strong head."

"No, indeed, I have a particularly weak one. And you?"

"I confess I'm very curious to see the view. I always want to read to
the end of a book, to walk to the turn of a road, and to climb to the
top of a building."

"Good," said Mlle. de Bergerac. "We'll wait for you."

Although in a straight line from the spot which we occupied, the
distance through the air to the rugged sides of the great cylinder of
masonry which frowned above us was not more than thirty yards, Coquelin
was obliged, in order to strike at the nearest accessible point the
winding staircase which clung to its massive ribs, to retrace his steps
through the interior of the castle and make a _détour_ of some five
minutes' duration. In ten minutes more he showed himself at an aperture
in the wall, facing our terrace.

"How do you prosper?" cried my aunt, raising her voice.

"I've mounted eighty steps," he shouted; "I've a hundred more."
Presently he appeared again at another opening. "The steps have
stopped," he cried.

"You've only to stop too," rejoined Mlle. de Bergerac. Again he was lost
to sight and we supposed he was returning. A quarter of an hour elapsed,
and we began to wonder at his not having overtaken us, when we heard a
loud call high above our heads. There he stood, on the summit of the
edifice, waving his hat. At this point he was so far above us that it
was difficult to communicate by sounds, in spite of our curiosity to
know how, in the absence of a staircase, he had effected the rest of the
ascent. He began to represent, by gestures of pretended rapture, the
immensity and beauty of the prospect. Finally Mlle. de Bergerac beckoned
to him to descend, and pointed to the declining sun, informing him at
the same time that we would go down and meet him in the lower part of
the castle. We left the terrace accordingly, and, making the best of our
way through the intricate passages of the edifice, at last, not without
a feeling of relief, found ourselves on the level earth. We waited quite
half an hour without seeing anything of our companion. My aunt, I could
see, had become anxious, although she endeavored to appear at her ease.
As the time elapsed, however, it became so evident that Coquelin had
encountered some serious obstacle to his descent, that Mlle. de Bergerac
proposed we should, in so far as was possible, betake ourselves to his
assistance. The point was to approach him within speaking distance.

We entered the body of the castle again, climbed to one of the upper
levels, and reached a spot where an extensive destruction of the
external wall partially exposed the great tower. As we approached this
crumbling breach, Mlle. de Bergerac drew back from its brink with a loud
cry of horror. It was not long before I discerned the cause of her
movement. The side of the tower visible from where we stood presented a
vast yawning fissure, which explained the interruption of the staircase,
the latter having fallen for want of support. The central column, to
which the steps had been fastened, seemed, nevertheless, still to be
erect, and to have formed, with the agglomeration of fallen fragments
and various occasional projections of masonry, the means by which
Coquelin, with extraordinary courage and skill, had reached the topmost
platform. The ascent, then, had been possible; the descent, curiously
enough, he seemed to have found another matter; and after striving in
vain to retrace his footsteps, had been obliged to commit himself to the
dangerous experiment of passing from the tower to the external surface
of the main fortress. He had accomplished half his journey and now stood
directly over against us in a posture which caused my young limbs to
stiffen with dismay. The point to which he had directed himself was
apparently the breach at which we stood; meanwhile he had paused,
clinging in mid-air to heaven knows what narrow ledge or flimsy iron
clump in the stone-work, and straining his nerves to an agonized tension
in the effort not to fall, while his eyes vaguely wandered in quest of
another footing. The wall of the castle was so immensely thick, that
wherever he could embrace its entire section, progress was comparatively
easy; the more especially as, above our heads, this same wall had been
demolished in such a way as to maintain a rapid upward inclination to
the point where it communicated with the tower.

I stood staring at Coquelin with my heart in my throat, forgetting (or
rather too young to reflect) that the sudden shock of seeing me where I
was might prove fatal to his equipoise. He perceived me, however, and
tried to smile. "Don't be afraid," he cried, "I'll be with you in a
moment." My aunt, who had fallen back, returned to the aperture, and
gazed at him with pale cheeks and clasped hands. He made a long step
forward, successfully, and, as he recovered himself, caught sight of her
face and looked at her with fearful intentness. Then seeing, I suppose,
that she was sickened by his insecurity, he disengaged one hand and
motioned her back. She retreated, paced in a single moment the length of
the enclosure in which we stood, returned and stopped just short of the
point at which she would have seen him again. She buried her face in her
hands, like one muttering a rapid prayer, and then advanced once more
within range of her friend's vision. As she looked at him, clinging in
mid-air and planting step after step on the jagged and treacherous edge
of the immense perpendicular chasm, she repressed another loud cry only
by thrusting her handkerchief into her mouth. He caught her eyes again,
gazed into them with piercing keenness, as if to drink in coolness and
confidence, and then, as she closed them again in horror, motioned me
with his head to lead her away. She returned to the farther end of the
apartment and leaned her head against the wall. I remained staring at
poor Coquelin, fascinated by the spectacle of his mingled danger and
courage. Inch by inch, yard by yard, I saw him lessen the interval which
threatened his life. It was a horrible, beautiful sight. Some five
minutes elapsed; they seemed like fifty. The last few yards he
accomplished with a rush; he reached the window which was the goal of
his efforts, swung himself in and let himself down by a prodigious leap
to the level on which we stood. Here he stopped, pale, lacerated, and
drenched with perspiration. He put out his hand to Mlle. de Bergerac,
who, at the sound of his steps, had turned herself about. On seeing him
she made a few steps forward and burst into tears. I took his extended
hand. He bent over me and kissed me, and then giving me a push, "Go and
kiss your poor aunt," he said. Mlle. de Bergerac clasped me to her
breast with a most convulsive pressure. From that moment till we reached
home, there was very little said. Both my companions had matter for
silent reflection,--Mlle. de Bergerac in the deep significance of that
offered hand, and Coquelin in the rich avowal of her tears.




PART III


A week after this memorable visit to Fossy, in emulation of my good
preceptor, I treated my friends, or myself at least, to a five minutes'
fright. Wandering beside the river one day when Coquelin had been
detained within doors to overlook some accounts for my father, I amused
myself, where the bank projected slightly over the stream, with kicking
the earth away in fragments, and watching it borne down the current. The
result may be anticipated: I came very near going the way of those same
fragments. I lost my foothold and fell into the stream, which, however,
was so shallow as to offer no great obstacle to self-preservation. I
scrambled ashore, wet to the bone, and, feeling rather ashamed of my
misadventure, skulked about in the fields for a couple of hours, in my
dripping clothes. Finally, there being no sun and my garments remaining
inexorably damp, my teeth began to chatter and my limbs to ache. I went
home and surrendered myself. Here again the result may be foreseen: the
next day I was laid up with a high fever.

Mlle. de Bergerac, as I afterwards learned, immediately appointed
herself my nurse, removed me from my little sleeping-closet to her own
room, and watched me with the most tender care. My illness lasted some
ten days, my convalescence a week. When I began to mend, my bed was
transferred to an unoccupied room adjoining my aunt's. Here, late one
afternoon, I lay languidly singing to myself and watching the western
sunbeams shimmering on the opposite wall. If you were ever ill as a
child, you will remember such moments. You look by the hour at your
thin, white hands; you listen to the sounds in the house, the opening of
doors and the tread of feet; you murmur strange odds and ends of talk;
and you watch the fading of the day and the dark flowering of the night.
Presently my aunt came in, introducing Coquelin, whom she left by my
bedside. He sat with me a long time, talking in the old, kind way, and
gradually lulled me to sleep with the gentle murmur of his voice. When I
awoke again it was night. The sun was quenched on the opposite wall, but
through a window on the same side came a broad ray of moonlight. In the
window sat Coquelin, who had apparently not left the room. Near him was
Mlle. de Bergerac.

Some time elapsed between my becoming conscious of their presence and my
distinguishing the sense of the words that were passing between them.
When I did so, if I had reached the age when one ponders and interprets
what one hears, I should readily have perceived that since those last
thrilling moments at Fossy their friendship had taken a very long step,
and that the secret of each heart had changed place with its mate. But
even now there was little that was careless and joyous in their young
love; the first words of Mlle. Bergerac that I distinguished betrayed
the sombre tinge of their passion.

"I don't care what happens now," she said. "It will always be something
to have lived through these days."

"You're stronger than I, then," said Coquelin. "I haven't the courage to
defy the future. I'm afraid to think of it. Ah, why can't we make a
future of our own?"

"It would be a greater happiness than we have a right to. Who are you,
Pierre Coquelin, that you should claim the right to marry the girl you
love, when she's a demoiselle de Bergerac to begin with? And who am I,
that I should expect to have deserved a greater blessing than that one
look of your eyes, which I shall never, never forget? It is more than
enough to watch you and pray for you and worship you in silence."

"What am I? what are you? We are two honest mortals, who have a perfect
right to repudiate the blessings of God. If ever a passion deserved its
reward, mademoiselle, it's the absolute love I bear you. It's not a
spasm, a miracle, or a delusion; it's the most natural emotion of my
nature."

"We don't live in a natural world, Coquelin. If we did, there would be
no need of concealing this divine affection. Great heaven! who's
natural? Is it my sister-in-law? Is it M. de Treuil? Is it my brother?
My brother is sometimes so natural that he's brutal. Is it I myself?
There are moments when I'm afraid of my nature."

It was too dark for me to distinguish my companions' faces in the course
of this singular dialogue; but it's not hard to imagine how, as my aunt
uttered these words, with a burst of sombre _naïveté_, her lover must
have turned upon her face the puzzled brightness of his eyes.

"What do you mean?" he asked.

"_Mon Dieu!_ think how I have lived! What a senseless, thoughtless,
passionless life! What solitude, ignorance, and languor! What trivial
duties and petty joys! I have fancied myself happy at times, for it was
God's mercy that I didn't know what I lacked. But now that my soul
begins to stir and throb and live, it shakes me with its mighty
pulsations. I feel as if in the mere wantonness of strength and joy it
might drive me to some extravagance. I seem to feel myself making a
great rush, with my eyes closed and my heart in my throat And then the
earth sinks away from under my feet, and in my ears is the sound of a
dreadful tumult."

"Evidently we have very different ways of feeling. For you our love is
action, passion; for me it's rest. For you it's romance; for me it's
reality. For me it's a necessity; for you (how shall I say it?) it's a
luxury. In point of fact, mademoiselle, how should it be otherwise? When
a demoiselle de Bergerac bestows her heart upon an obscure adventurer, a
man born in poverty and servitude, it's a matter of charity, of noble
generosity."

Mlle. de Bergerac received this speech in silence, and for some moments
nothing was said. At last she resumed: "After all that has passed
between us, Coquelin, it seems to me a matter neither of generosity nor
of charity to allude again to that miserable fact of my birth."

"I was only trying to carry out your own idea, and to get at the truth
with regard to our situation. If our love is worth a straw, we needn't
be afraid of that. Isn't it true--blessedly true, perhaps, for all I
know--that you shrink a little from taking me as I am? Except for my
character, I'm so little! It's impossible to be less of a _personage._
You can't quite reconcile it to your dignity to love a nobody, so you
fling over your weakness a veil of mystery and romance and exaltation.
You regard your passion, perhaps, as more of an escapade, an adventure,
than it needs to be."

"My 'nobody,'" said Mlle. de Bergerac, gently, "is a very wise man, and
a great philosopher. I don't understand a word you say."

"Ah, so much the better!" said Coquelin with a little laugh.

"Will you promise me," pursued the young girl, "never again by word or
deed to allude to the difference of our birth? If you refuse, I shall
consider you an excellent pedagogue, but no lover."

"Will you in return promise me--"

"Promise you what?"

Coquelin was standing before her, looking at her, with folded arms.
"Promise me likewise to forget it!"

Mlle. de Bergerac stared a moment, and also rose to her feet. "Forget
it! Is this generous?" she cried. "Is it delicate? I had pretty well
forgot it, I think, on that dreadful day at Fossy!" Her voice trembled
and swelled; she burst into tears. Coquelin attempted to remonstrate,
but she motioned him aside, and swept out of the room.

It must have been a very genuine passion between these two, you'll
observe, to allow this handling without gloves. Only a plant of hardy
growth could have endured this chilling blast of discord and
disputation. Ultimately, indeed, its effect seemed to have been to
fortify and consecrate their love. This was apparent several days later;
but I know not what manner of communication they had had in the
interval. I was much better, but I was still weak and languid. Mlle. de
Bergerac brought me my breakfast in bed, and then, having helped me to
rise and dress, led me out into the garden, where she had caused a chair
to be placed in the shade. While I sat watching the bees and
butterflies, and pulling the flowers to pieces, she strolled up and down
the alley close at hand, taking slow stitches in a piece of embroidery.
We had been so occupied about ten minutes, when Coquelin came towards us
from his lodge,--by appointment, evidently, for this was a roundabout
way to the house. Mlle. de Bergerac met him at the end of the path,
where I could not hear what they said, but only see their gestures. As
they came along together, she raised both hands to her ears, and shook
her head with vehemence, as if to refuse to listen to what he was
urging. When they drew near my resting-place, she had interrupted him.

"No, no, no!" she cried, "I will never forget it to my dying day. How
should I? How can I look at you without remembering it? It's in your
face, your figure, your movements, the tones of your voice. It's
you,--it's what I love in you! It was that which went through my heart
that day at Fossy. It was the look, the tone, with which you called the
place horrible; it was your bitter plebeian hate. When you spoke of the
misery and baseness of your race, I could have cried out in an anguish
of love! When I contradicted you, and pretended that I prized and
honored all these tokens of your servitude,--just heaven! you know now
what my words were worth!"

Coquelin walked beside her with his hands clasped behind him, and his
eyes fixed on the ground with a look of repressed sensibility. He passed
his poor little convalescent pupil without heeding him. When they came
down the path again, the young girl was still talking with the same
feverish volubility.

"But most of all, the first day, the first hour, when you came up the
avenue to my brother! I had never seen any one like you. I had seen
others, but you had something that went to my soul. I devoured you with
my eyes,--your dusty clothes, your uncombed hair, your pale face, the
way you held yourself not to seem tired. I went down on my knees, then;
I haven't been up since."

The poor girl, you see, was completely possessed by her passion, and yet
she was in a very strait place. For her life she wouldn't recede; and
yet how was she to advance? There must have been an odd sort of
simplicity in her way of bestowing her love; or perhaps you'll think it
an odd sort of subtlety. It seems plain to me now, as I tell the story,
that Coquelin, with his perfect good sense, was right, and that there
was, at this moment, a large element of romance in the composition of
her feelings. She seemed to feel no desire to realize her passion. Her
hand was already bestowed; fate was inexorable. She wished simply to
compress a world of bliss into her few remaining hours of freedom.

The day after this interview in the garden I came down to dinner; on the
next I sat up to supper, and for some time afterwards, thanks to my
aunt's preoccupation of mind. On rising from the table, my father left
the château; my mother, who was ailing, returned to her room. Coquelin
disappeared, under pretence of going to his own apartments; but, Mlle.
de Bergerac having taken me into the drawing-room and detained me there
some minutes, he shortly rejoined us.

"Great heaven, mademoiselle, this must end!" he cried, as he came into
the room. "I can stand it no longer."

"Nor can I," said my aunt. "But I have given my word."

"Take back your word, then! Write him a letter--go to him--send me to
him--anything! I can't stay here on the footing of a thief and impostor.
I'll do anything," he continued, as she was silent. "I'll go to him in
person; I'll go to your brother; I'll go to your sister even. I'll
proclaim it to the world. Or, if you don't like that. I'll keep it a
mortal secret. I'll leave the château with you without an hour's delay.
I'll defy pursuit and discovery. We'll go to America,--anywhere you
wish, if it's only action. Only spare me the agony of seeing you drift
along into that man's arms."

Mlle. de Bergerac made no reply for some moments. At last, "I will never
marry M. de Treuil," she said.

To this declaration Coquelin made no response; but after a pause, "Well,
well, well?" he cried.

"Ah, you're pitiless!" said the young girl.

"No, mademoiselle, from the bottom of my heart I pity you."

"Well, then, think of all you ask! Think of the inexpiable criminality
of my love. Think of me standing here,--here before my mother's
portrait,--murmuring out my shame, scorched by my sister's scorn,
buffeted by my brother's curses! Gracious heaven, Coquelin, suppose
after all I were a bad, hard girl!"

"I'll suppose nothing; this is no time for hair-splitting." And then,
after a pause, as if with a violent effort, in a voice hoarse and yet
soft: "Gabrielle, passion is blind. Reason alone is worth a straw. I'll
not counsel you in passion, let us wait till reason comes to us." He put
out his hand; she gave him her own; he pressed it to his lips and
departed.

On the following day, as I still professed myself too weak to resume my
books, Coquelin left the château alone, after breakfast, for a long
walk. He was going, I suppose, into the woods and meadows in quest of
Reason. She was hard to find, apparently, for he failed to return to
dinner. He reappeared, however, at supper, but now my father was absent.
My mother, as she left the table, expressed the wish that Mlle. de
Bergerac should attend her to her own room. Coquelin, meanwhile, went
with me into the great saloon, and for half an hour talked to me gravely
and kindly about my studies, and questioned me on what we had learned
before my illness. At the end of this time Mlle. de Bergerac returned.

"I got this letter to-day from M. de Treuil," she said, and offered him
a missive which had apparently been handed to her since dinner.

"I don't care to read it," he said.

She tore it across and held the pieces to the flame of the candle. "He
is to be here to-morrow," she added finally.

"Well?" asked Coquelin gravely.

"You know my answer."

"Your answer to him, perfectly. But what is your answer to me?"

She looked at him in silence. They stood for a minute, their eyes locked
together. And then, in the same posture,--her arms loose at her sides,
her head slightly thrown back,--"To you," she said, "my answer
is--farewell."

The word was little more than whispered; but, though he heard it, he
neither started nor spoke. He stood unmoved, all his soul trembling
under his brows and filling the space between his mistress and himself
with a sort of sacred stillness. Then, gradually, his head sank on his
breast, and his eyes dropped on the ground.

"It's reason," the young girl began. "Reason has come to me. She tells
me that if I marry in my brother's despite, and in opposition to all the
traditions that have been kept sacred in my family, I shall neither find
happiness nor give it. I must choose the simplest course. The other is a
gulf; I can't leap it. It's harder than you think. Something in the air
forbids it,--something in the very look of these old walls, within which
I was born and I've lived. I shall never marry; I shall go into
religion. I tried to fling away my name; it was sowing dragons' teeth. I
don't ask you to forgive me. It's small enough comfort that you should
have the right to think of me as a poor, weak heart. Keep repeating
that: it will console you. I shall not have the compensation of doubting
the perfection of what I love."

Coquelin turned away in silence. Mlle. de Bergerac sprang after him.
"In Heaven's name," she cried, "say something! Rave, storm, swear, but
don't let me think I've broken your heart."

"My heart's sound," said Coquelin, almost with a smile. "I regret
nothing that has happened. O, how I love you!"

The young girl buried her face in her hands.

"This end," he went on, "is doubtless the only possible one. It's
thinking very lightly of life to expect any other. After all, what call
had I to interrupt your life,--to burden you with a trouble, a choice, a
decision? As much as anything that I have ever known in you I admire
your beautiful delicacy of conscience."

"Ah," said the young girl, with a moan, "don't kill me with fine names!"

And then came the farewell. "I feel," said poor Coquelin, "that
I can't see you again. We must not meet. I will leave Bergerac
immediately,--to-night,--under pretext of having been summoned home by
my mother's illness. In a few days I will write to your brother that
circumstances forbid me to return."

My own part in this painful interview I shall not describe at length.
When it began to dawn upon my mind that my friend was actually going to
disappear, I was seized with a convulsion of rage and grief. "Ah," cried
Mlle. de Bergerac bitterly, "that was all that was wanting!" What means
were taken to restore me to composure, what promises were made me, what
pious deception was practised, I forget; but, when at last I came to my
senses, Coquelin had made his exit.

My aunt took me by the hand and prepared to-lead me up to bed, fearing
naturally that my ruffled aspect and swollen visage would arouse
suspicion. At this moment I heard the clatter of hoofs in the court,
mingled with the sound of voices. From the window, I saw M. de Treuil
and my father alighting from horseback. Mlle. de Bergerac, apparently,
made the same observation; she dropped my hand and sank down in a chair.
She was not left long in suspense. Perceiving a light in the saloon, the
two gentlemen immediately made their way to this apartment. They came in
together, arm in arm, the Vicomte dressed in mourning. Just within the
threshold they stopped; my father disengaged his arm, took his companion
by the hand and led him to Mlle. de Bergerac. She rose to her feet as
you may imagine a sitting statue to rise. The Vicomte bent his knee.

"At last, mademoiselle," said he,--"sooner than I had hoped,--my long
probation is finished."

The young girl spoke, but no one would have recognized her voice. "I
fear, M. le Vicomte," she said, "that it has only begun."

The Vicomte broke into a harsh, nervous laugh.

"Fol de rol, mademoiselle," cried my father, "your pleasantry is in very
bad taste."

But the Vicomte had recovered himself. "Mademoiselle is quite right," he
declared; "she means that I must now begin to deserve my happiness."
This little speech showed a very brave fancy. It was in flagrant discord
with the expression of the poor girl's figure, as she stood twisting her
hands together and rolling her eyes,--an image of sombre desperation.

My father felt there was a storm in the air. "M. le Vicomte is in
mourning for M. de Sorbières," he said. "M. le Vicomte is his sole
legatee. He comes to exact the fulfilment of your promise."

"I made no promise," said Mlle. de Bergerac.

"Excuse me, mademoiselle; you gave your word that you'd wait for me."

"Gracious heaven!" cried the young girl; "haven't I waited for you!"

"_Ma toute belle_" said the Baron, trying to keep his angry voice within
the compass of an undertone, and reducing it in the effort to a very
ugly whisper, "if I had supposed you were going to make us a scene, _nom
de Dieu!_ I would have taken my precautions beforehand! You know what
you're to expect. Vicomte, keep her to her word. I'll give you half an
hour. Come, Chevalier." And he took me by the hand.

We had crossed the threshold and reached the hall, when I heard the
Vicomte give a long moan, half plaintive, half indignant. My father
turned, and answered with a fierce, inarticulate cry, which I can best
describe as a roar. He straightway retraced his steps, I, of course,
following. Exactly what, in the brief interval, had passed between our
companions I am unable to say; but it was plain that Mlle. de Bergerac,
by some cruelly unerring word or act, had discharged the bolt of her
refusal. Her gallant lover had sunk into a chair, burying his face in
his hands, and stamping his feet on the floor in a frenzy of
disappointment. She stood regarding him in a sort of helpless, distant
pity. My father had been going to break out into a storm of
imprecations; but he suppressed them, and folded his arms.

"And now, mademoiselle," he said, "will you be so good as to inform me
of your intentions?"

Beneath my father's gaze the softness passed out of my aunt's face and
gave place to an angry defiance, which he must have recognized as
cousin-german, at least, to the passion in his own breast. "My
intentions had been," she said, "to let M. le Vicomte know that I
couldn't marry him, with as little offence as possible. But you seem
determined, my brother, to thrust in a world of offence somewhere."

You must not blame Mlle. de Bergerac for the sting of her retort. She
foresaw a hard fight; she had only sprung to her arms.

My father looked at the wretched Vicomte, as he sat sobbing and stamping
like a child His bosom was wrung with pity for his friend "Look at that
dear Gaston, that charming man, and blush for your audacity."

"I know a great deal more about my audacity than you, brother. I might
tell you things that would surprise you."

"Gabrielle, you are mad!" the Baron broke out.

"Perhaps I am," said the young girl. And then, turning to M. de Treuil,
in a tone of exquisite reproach, "M. le Vicomte, you suffer less well
than I had hoped."

My father could endure no more. He seized his sister by her two wrists,
so that beneath the pressure her eyes filled with tears. "Heartless
fool!" he cried, "do you know what I can do to you?"

"I can imagine, from this specimen," said the poor creature.

The Baron was beside himself with passion. "Down, down on your knees,"
he went on, "and beg our pardon all round for your senseless, shameless
perversity!" As he spoke, he increased the pressure of his grasp to that
degree that, after a vain struggle to free herself, she uttered a scream
of pain. The Vicomte sprang to his feet. "In heaven's name, Gabrielle,"
he cried,--and it was the only real _naïveté_ that he had ever
uttered,--"isn't it all a horrible jest?"

Mlle. de Bergerac shook her head. "It seems hard. Vicomte," she said,
"that I should be answerable for your happiness."

"You hold it there in your hand. Think of what I suffer. To have lived
for weeks in the hope of this hour, and to find it what you would fain
make it! To have dreamed of rapturous bliss, and to wake to find it
hideous misery! Think of it once again!"

"She shall have a chance to think of it," the Baron declared; "she shall
think of it quite at her ease. Go to your room, mademoiselle, and remain
there till further notice."

Gabrielle prepared to go, but, as she moved away, "I used to fear you,
brother," she said with homely scorn, "but I don't fear you now. Judge
whether it's because I love you more!"

"Gabrielle," the Vicomte cried out, "I haven't given you up."

"Your feelings are your own, M. le Vicomte. I would have given more than
I can say rather than have caused you to suffer. Your asking my hand has
been the great honor of my life; my withholding it has been the great
trial." And she walked out of the room with the step of unacted tragedy.
My father, with an oath, despatched me to bed in her train. Heavy-headed
with the recent spectacle of so much half-apprehended emotion, I
speedily fell asleep.

I was aroused by the sound of voices, and the grasp of a heavy hand on
my shoulder. My father stood before me, holding a candle, with M. de
Treuil beside him. "Chevalier," he said, "open your eyes like a man, and
come to your senses."

Thus exhorted, I sat up and stared. The Baron sat down on the edge of
the bed. "This evening," he began, "before the Vicomte and I came in,
were you alone with your aunt?"--My dear friend, you see the scene from
here. I answered with the cruel directness of my years. Even if I had
had the wit to dissemble, I should have lacked the courage. Of course I
had no story to tell. I had drawn no inferences; I didn't say that my
tutor was my aunt's lover. I simply said that he had been with us after
supper, and that he wanted my aunt to go away with him. Such was my part
in the play. I see the whole picture again,--my father brandishing the
candlestick, and devouring my words with his great flaming eyes; and the
Vicomte behind, portentously silent, with his black clothes and his pale
face.

They had not been three minutes out of the room when the door leading to
my aunt's chamber opened and Mlle. de Bergerac appeared. She had heard
sounds in my apartment, and suspected the visit of the gentlemen and its
motive. She immediately won from me the recital of what I had been
forced to avow. "Poor Chevalier," she cried, for all commentary. And
then, after a pause, "What made them suspect that M. Coquelin had been
with us?"

"They saw him, or some one, leave the château as they came in."

"And where have they gone now?"

"To supper. My father said to M. de Treuil that first of all they must
sup."

Mlle. de Bergerac stood a moment in meditation. Then suddenly, "Get up,
Chevalier," she said, "I want you to go with me."

"Where are you going?"

"To M. Coquelin's."

I needed no second admonition. I hustled on my clothes; Mlle. de
Bergerac left the room and immediately returned, clad in a light mantle.
We made our way undiscovered to one of the private entrances of the
château, hurried across the park and found a light in the window of
Coquelin's lodge. It was about half past nine. Mlle. de Bergerac gave a
loud knock at the door, and we entered her lover's apartment.

Coquelin was seated at his table writing. He sprang to his feet with a
cry of amazement. Mlle. de Bergerac stood panting, with one hand pressed
to her heart, while rapidly moving the other as if to enjoin calmness.

"They are come back," she began,--"M. de Treuil and my brother!"

"I thought he was to come to-morrow. Was it a deception?"

"Ah, no! not from him,--an accident Pierre Coquelin, I've had such a
scene! But it's not your fault."

"What made the scene?"

"My refusal, of course."

"You turned off the Vicomte?"

"Holy Virgin! You ask me?"

"Unhappy girl!" cried Coquelin.

"No, I was a happy girl to have had a chance to act as my heart bade me.
I had faltered enough. But it was hard!"

"It's all hard."

"The hardest is to come," said my aunt She put out her hand; he sprang
to her and seized it, and she pressed his own with vehemence. "They have
discovered our secret,--don't ask how. It was Heaven's will. From this
moment, of course--"

"From this moment, of course," cried Coquelin, "I stay where I am!"

With an impetuous movement she raised his hand to her lips and kissed
it. "You stay where you are. We have nothing to conceal, but we have
nothing to avow. We have no confessions to make. Before God we have done
our duty. You may expect them, I fancy, to-night; perhaps, too, they
will honor me with a visit. They are supping between two battles. They
will attack us with fury, I know; but let them dash themselves against
our silence as against a wall of stone. I have taken my stand. My love,
my errors, my longings, are my own affair. My reputation is a sealed
book. Woe to him who would force it open!"

The poor girl had said once, you know, that she was afraid of her
nature. Assuredly it had now sprung erect in its strength; it came
hurrying into action on the winds of her indignation. "Remember,
Coquelin," she went on, "you are still and always my friend. You are the
guardian of my weakness, the support of my strength."

"Say it all, Gabrielle!" he cried. "I'm for ever and ever your lover!"

Suddenly, above the music of his voice, there came a great rattling
knock at the door. Coquelin sprang forward; it opened in his face and
disclosed my father and M. de Treuil. I have no words in my dictionary,
no images in my rhetoric, to represent the sudden horror that leaped
into my father's face as his eye fell upon his sister. He staggered back
a step and then stood glaring, until his feelings found utterance in a
single word: "_Coureuse!_" I have never been able to look upon the word
as trivial since that moment.

The Vicomte came striding past him into the room, like a bolt of
lightning from a rumbling cloud, quivering with baffled desire, and
looking taller by the head for his passion. "And it was for this,
mademoiselle," he cried, "and for _that!_" and he flung out a scornful
hand toward Coquelin. "For a beggarly, boorish, ignorant pedagogue!"

Coquelin folded his arms. "Address me directly, M. le Vicomte," he said;
"don't fling mud at me over mademoiselle's head."

"You? Who are you?" hissed the nobleman. "A man doesn't address you;
he sends his lackeys to flog you!"

"Well, M. le Vicomte, you're complete," said Coquelin, eyeing him from
head to foot.

"Complete?" and M. de Treuil broke into an almost hysterical laugh. "I
only lack having married your mistress!"

"Ah!" cried Mlle. de Bergerac.

"O, you poor, insensate fool!" said Coquelin.

"Heaven help me," the young man went on, "I'm ready to marry her still."

While these words were rapidly exchanged, my father stood choking with
the confusion of amusement and rage. He was stupefied at his sister's
audacity,--at the dauntless spirit which ventured to flaunt its shameful
passion in the very face of honor and authority. Yet that simple
interjection which I have quoted from my aunt's lips stirred a secret
tremor in his heart; it was like the striking of some magic silver hell,
portending monstrous things. His passion faltered, and, as his eyes
glanced upon my innocent head (which, it must be confessed, was sadly
out of place in that pernicious scene), alighted on this smaller wrong.
"The next time you go on your adventures, mademoiselle," he cried, "I'd
thank you not to pollute my son by dragging him at your skirts."

"I'm not sorry to have my family present," said the young girl, who had
had time to collect her thoughts. "I should be glad even if my sister
were here. I wish simply to bid you farewell."

Coquelin, at these words, made a step towards her. She passed her hand
through his arm. "Things have taken place--and chiefly within the last
moment--which change the face of the future. You've done the business,
brother," and she fixed her glittering eyes on the Baron; "you've driven
me back on myself. I spared you, but you never spared me. I cared for my
name; you loaded it with dishonor. I chose between happiness and
duty,--duty as you would have laid it down: I preferred duty. But now
that happiness has become one with simple safety from violence and
insult, I go back to happiness. I give you back your name; though I have
kept it more jealously than you. I have another ready for me. O
Messieurs!" she cried, with a burst of rapturous exaltation, "for what
you have done to me I thank you."

My father began to groan and tremble. He had grasped my hand in his own,
which was clammy with perspiration. "For the love of God, Gabrielle," he
implored, "or the fear of the Devil, speak so that a sickened, maddened
Christian can understand you! For what purpose did you come here
to-night?"

"_Mon Dieu_, it's a long story. You made short work with it. I might in
justice do as much. I came here, brother, to guard my reputation, and
not to lose it."

All this while my father had neither looked at Coquelin nor spoken to
him, either because he thought him not worth his words, or because he
had kept some transcendent insult in reserve. Here my governor broke in.
"It seems to me time, M. le Baron, that I should inquire the purpose of
your own visit."

My father stared a moment. "I came, M. Coquelin, to take you by the
shoulders and eject you through that door, with the further impulsion,
if necessary, of a vigorous kick."

"Good! And M. le Vicomte?"

"M. le Vicomte came to see it done."

"Perfect! A little more and you had come too late. I was on the point of
leaving Bergerac. I can put the story into three words. I have been so
happy as to secure the affections of Mlle. de Bergerac. She asked
herself, devoutly, what course of action was possible under the
circumstances. She decided that the only course was that we should
immediately separate. I had no hesitation in bringing my residence with
M. le Chevalier to a sudden close. I was to have quitted the château
early to-morrow morning, leaving mademoiselle at absolute liberty. With
her refusal of M. de Treuil I have nothing to do. Her action in this
matter seems to have been strangely precipitated, and my own departure
anticipated in consequence. It was at her adjuration that I was
preparing to depart. She came here this evening to command me to stay.
In our relations there was nothing that the world had a right to lay a
finger upon. From the moment that they were suspected it was of the
first importance to the security and sanctity of Mlle. de Bergerac's
position that there should be no appearance on my part of elusion or
flight. The relations I speak of had ceased to exist; there was,
therefore, every reason why for the present I should retain my place.
Mlle. de Bergerac had been here some three minutes, and had just made
known her wishes, when you arrived with the honorable intentions which
you avow, and under that illusion the perfect stupidity of which is its
least reproach. In my own turn. Messieurs, I thank you!"

"Gabrielle," said my father, as Coquelin ceased speaking, "the long and
short of it appears to be that after all you needn't marry this man. Am
I to understand that you intend to?"

"Brother, I mean to marry M. Coquelin."

My father stood looking from the young girl to her lover. The Vicomte
walked to the window, as if he were in want of air. The night was cool
and the window closed. He tried the sash, but for some reason it
resisted. Whereupon he raised his sword-hilt and with a violent blow
shivered a pane into fragments. The Baron went on: "On what do you
propose to live?"

"It's for me to propose," said Coquelin. "My wife shall not suffer."

"Whither do you mean to go?"

"Since you're so good as to ask,--to Paris."

My father had got back his fire. "Well, then," he cried, "my bitterest
unforgiveness go with you, and turn your unholy pride to abject woe! My
sister may marry a base-born vagrant if she wants, but I shall not give
her away. I hope you'll enjoy the mud in which you've planted yourself.
I hope your marriage will be blessed in the good old fashion, and that
you'll regard philosophically the sight of a half-dozen starving
children. I hope you'll enjoy the company of chandlers and cobblers and
scribblers!" The Baron could go no further. "Ah, my sister!" he half
exclaimed. His voice broke; he gave a great convulsive sob, and fell
into a chair.

"Coquelin," said my aunt, "take me back to the château."

As she walked to the door, her hand in the young man's arm, the Vicomte
turned short about from the window, and stood with his drawn sword,
grimacing horribly.

"Not if I can help it!" he cried through his teeth, and with a sweep of
his weapon he made a savage thrust at the young girl's breast Coquelin,
with equal speed, sprang before her, threw out his arm, and took the
blow just below the elbow.

"Thank you, M. le Vicomte," he said, "for the chance of calling you a
coward! There was something I wanted."

Mlle. de Bergerac spent the night at the château, but by early dawn she
had disappeared. Whither Coquelin betook himself with his gratitude and
his wound, I know not. He lay, I suppose, at some neighboring farmer's.
My father and the Vicomte kept for an hour a silent, sullen vigil in my
preceptor's vacant apartment,--for an hour and perhaps longer, for at
the end of this time I fell asleep, and when I came to my senses, the
next morning, I was in my own bed.


M. de Bergerac had finished his talk.

"But the marriage," I asked, after a pause,--"was it happy?"

"Reasonably so, I fancy. There is no doubt that Coquelin was an
excellent fellow. They had three children, and lost them all. They
managed to live. He painted portraits and did literary work.

"And his wife?"

"Her history, I take it, is that of all good wives: she loved her
husband. When the Revolution came, they went into politics; but here, in
spite of his base birth, Coquelin acted with that superior temperance
which I always associate with his memory. He was no _sans-culotte._ They
both went to the scaffold among the Girondists."

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GABRIELLE DE BERGERAC ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
